---
layout: default
title: 'The Numerical Discourses | 9. The Only Son | 5. Downfall'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: EA_09_04.html
next: EA_09_06.html
---

# [The Numerical Discourses](../index.html)
## Chapter 9: The Only Son
### 5. Downfall

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “When I continuously examine the things that a person thinks about in their mind, I see: ‘This person will fall to Hell[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2} in the time it takes to flex their arm.’ Why is that? Because of their evil thoughts, their mind becomes ill, and they fall down into Hell.”
{:#p2}

3\. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
{:#p3}

* {:.verse}“Suppose that a person\\
Harbors hateful notions in their heart.\\
Now, I’ll tell you monks\\
The meaning of this in detail.

* {:.verse}Supposing their life were to end\\
Right at this moment in time,\\
Then they would be sent to Hell\\
Because of their mind’s defiled conduct.

4\. “Therefore, monks, one should control their mind and not do defiled conduct. Thus, monks, you should train yourselves.”
{:#p4}

5\. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
{:#p5}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This <em>sūtra</em> is parallel to [AN 1.43](https://www.suttacentral.net/an1.43){:target="_blank"} and [Iti 20](https://www.suttacentral.net/iti20){:target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2} *Hell*. C. 泥㴝 or 泥犂 (MC. nei-lei = G. *nara[ga]*), P/S. *naraka*. The Chinese transliterates the Indic word that was equivalent to English “Hell” as a place of punishment in the afterlife. *Naraka* literally means a pit, so a literal translation to English could be “the Pit.” The next occurrence of “Hell,” however, translates the Indic name to Chinese as 地獄 (lit. “earth prison”). [\[back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 3 March 2023
{: .revised}

---