---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 35. Views | 61. Wrong View Regarding Actions'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA35_58.html
next: SA35_64.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [35. Views](index.html)
### 61. Wrong View Regarding Actions

1\. Thus have I heard: One time, the Buddha stayed at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove in Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}
2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “What is it that exists, that arises, that ties, that’s an attachment, and that’s viewed as self and causes sentient beings to create such views and such statements? ‘Seven bodies are not made, not made by a maker, not created, and not created by a creator. They are not killed, not disturbed, and substantial. What are the seven? They are the body of earth, body of water, body of fire, body of wind, pleasure, pain, and life. These seven kinds of body are not made, not made by a maker, not created, and not created by a creator. They are not killed, not disturbed, and substantial. They don’t evolve, don’t change, and don’t constrain each other. Whether good, evil, or good and evil, whether painful, pleasant, or painful and pleasant, or whether a man who beheads or [the other] man’s head, these things don’t constrain the world. Whether it’s his life or body, the blade passes between the seven bodies and returns, but it doesn’t harm his life. Nothing is killed by that, and there’s no killer. Nothing is bound, and there’s no binder. Nothing is thought, and there’s no thinker. Nothing is taught, and there’s no teacher.’”
{: #p2}
3\. The monks said to the Buddha, “The Bhagavān is the Dharma root, the Dharma eye, and the Dharma refuge …” *It’s thus explained in detail and in the sequence of the three sutras (35.7-9) above.*
{: #p3}

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 24 July 2020
{: .revised}