---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 35. Views | 67. Wrong View Regarding Rebirth'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA35_64.html
next: ../index.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [35. Views](index.html)
### 67. Wrong View Regarding Rebirth

1\. Thus have I heard: One time, the Buddha stayed at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta’s Grove in Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “What is it that exists, that arises, that ties, that’s an attachment, and that’s viewed as self and causes sentient beings to create such views and such statements? ‘Here there are 1,400,000 ways of creation, 60,605 actions, three actions, two actions, one action, and a half-action. There are 62 pathways, 62 inner eons, 120 hells, 130 faculties, 36 realms of craving, 49,000 nāga homes, and 49,000 garuḍa homes. There are 49,000 heretics of wrong livelihood and 49,000 heretics who leave home. There are seven eons of perception and seven eons without perception. There are seven asuras, seven piśācīs, seven gods, and seven humans. There are 700 oceans, seven dreams, 700 dreams, seven peaks, 700 peaks, seven feelings, 700 feelings, six births, 10 progressions, and 8 regions of great men. Here there are 84,000 great eons. Both the foolish and the wise are continuously reborn until the ultimate limit of suffering. There are no ascetics or priests who say, “I always observe precepts and accept ascetic practices. I cultivate the religious practices, making unripe actions ripen and ripened actions to be discarded.” Progress and retreat can’t be known. These pains and pleasures are always present for the definite measure of birth-and-death. Like a ball of thread tossed into the air that gradually falls to the ground on its own, likewise is this definite measure of 84,000 great eons of birth-and-death.’”
{: #p2}

3\. The monks said to the Buddha, “The Bhagavān is the Dharma root, the Dharma eye, and the Dharma refuge …” *It’s thus explained in detail and in the sequence of the three sutras (35.7-9) above.*
{: #p3}

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 24 July 2020
{: .revised}