---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. Factors of the Noble Path | 25. Wrong and Right'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA13_24.html
next: SA13_26.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 25. Wrong and Right

1\. Thus have I heard: One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove in Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “You must part with wrong views; you must stop wrong views. If stopping wrong views wasn’t possible, then I would never say that you must part with and stop wrong views. It’s because wrong views can be stopped that I say a monk should part with wrong views. If he doesn’t part with wrong views, then wrong views will make him undertake what’s aimless, unbeneficial, and painful. I therefore say you must part with wrong views. I also say this of wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration.
{: #p2}

3\. “Monks, after you part with wrong views, you must cultivate right views. If cultivating right views wasn’t possible, I would never say that you must cultivate right views. It’s because right views can be cultivated that I say a monk must cultivate right views. If he doesn’t cultivate right views, he will undertake what’s aimless, unbeneficial, and painful. Because not cultivating right views undertakes what’s aimless, unbeneficial, and painful, I therefore say he must cultivate right views. Because they are purposeful and beneficial, he’ll always attain well-being. Therefore, monks, you must cultivate right views. I also say this of right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.”
{: #p3}

4\. After the Buddha taught this sutra, the monks who heard what he taught rejoiced and handed it down.
{: #p4}

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 24 July 2020
{: .revised}

---
