---
layout: default
title: 'The Numerical Discourses | 12. The Single-Entry Path | 10. Śrīla'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: EA_12_09.html
next: ../13/EA_13_01.html
---

# [The Numerical Discourses](../index.html)
## Chapter 12: The Single-Entry Path
### 10. Śrīla

1\. Thus I have heard: One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “Someone taking profit is a serious thing, not an easy thing,[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} for it prevents a person from reaching the unconditioned abode. Why is that? If that monk Śrīla[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2} hadn’t craved profit, it wouldn’t have occurred to him to kill measureless beings. He was born in Hell after his body broke up and his life ended.”
{:#p2}

3\. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
{:#p3}

* {:.verse}“Taking profit is a serious thing;\\
It can ruin a person’s clean conduct.\\
Therefore, you must discipline your thinking;\\
Don’t take delight in that greedy longing.

* {:.verse}Because he attained samādhi, Śrīla\\
Ascended up to Lord Śakra’s palace.\\
He regressed from that spiritual knowledge\\
And then fell back down to a slaughterhouse.”

4\. “Therefore, monks, you should know from this that taking profit is a serious thing, not an easy thing.[\[3\]](#n3){:#ref2} Control and prevent thoughts about profit before they arise. If they’ve already arisen, work to make them cease. Thus, monks, you should train yourselves.”
{:#p4}

5\. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
{:#p5}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} <em>a serious thing, not an easy thing</em>. C. 甚為不易. The previous <em>sutra</em> has the same opening line, which reads 甚<strong>重</strong>、不易. I’ve corrected this passage assuming a copyist has replaced 重 with 為. [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2} <em>Śrīla</em>. C. 師利羅 (EMC. ṣïi-lɪi-la = G. <em>śirila</em> = S. <em>śrīla</em>). This personal name is attested in G. sources, but the particular figure being referenced here is thus far unknown to me. [\[back\]](#ref2)
3. {:#n3} <em>a serious thing, not an easy thing</em>. The same correction applies here as in the opening of the <em>sūtra</em>. I’ve also ignored the spurious insertion of “Thus, monks, you should train yourselves” that occurs at this point. [\[back\]](#ref3)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 12 July 2023
{: .revised}

---