---
layout: default
title: 'The Numerical Discourses | 12. One Entry to the Path | 1. The Four Stations of Mind'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: index.html
next: EA_19_02.html
---

# [The Numerical Discourses](../../index.html)
## Chapter 12: One Entry to the Path
### 1. The Four Stations of Mind

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha stayed in the country of Śrāvastī at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “There’s one entry to the path that purifies the conduct of sentient beings. It leads them away from grief, has no disturbances, attains great wisdom, and achieves realization of nirvāṇa. That is to say, it will cease the five hindrances and reflect on the four stations of mind. What’s called this one entry? It refers to focusing on one thought. This is called one entry. What is this path? It refers to the noble eightfold path: 1) right view, 2) right governance, 3) right action, 4) right livelihood, 5) right method, 6) right speech, 7) right mindfulness, and 8) right concentration. These are called the path, and this is the one entry to the path.
{: #p2}

3\. “What are the five hindrances that it will cease? That refers to the hindrance of desire, hindrance of anger, hindrance of restlessness, hindrance of drowsiness, and the hindrance of doubt. These are called the five hindrances that it will cease.
{: #p3}

4\. “What is reflection on the four stations of mind? Here, a monk contemplates his own body internally, turning away bad thoughts and having no grief. He contemplates his own body externally, turning away bad thoughts and having no grief. He contemplates his body internally and externally, turning away bad thoughts and having no grief. He contemplates feelings as feelings internally and relaxes. He contemplates feelings as feelings externally and contemplates feelings as feelings internally and externally. He contemplates his mind internally and relaxes. He contemplates mind externally and contemplates mind internally and externally. He contemplates principles internally, contemplates principles externally, and contemplates principles internally and externally as he relaxes.
{: #p4}

#### Contemplation of Body

5\. “How does a monk contemplate his body internally and relaxes? Here, a monk contemplates this body according to its nature and activity. From head to toe and from toe to head, he contemplates all the impurities in his body, none of which are desirable. Just as he observes this body with its hair, beard, nails, teeth, sinews, bones, marrow, brain, fat, intestines, stomach, heart, liver, spleen, and kidneys, he observes and knows them all these parts. He should observe and know its dung, urine, vomit, diarrhea, tears, spit, blood, grease, and bile, none of which are desirable. Thus, monks, you should contemplate the body and relax, turning away bad thoughts and having no grief.
{: #p5}

6\. “Furthermore, a monk returns to contemplating this body as possessing the earth element and the elements of water, fire, and air. Thus, a monk contemplates this body.
{: #p6}

7\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates this body by discerning its elements: ‘This body has four elements.’ He’s just like a butcher or a butcher’s apprentice cutting a cow apart. He examines and sees for himself, ‘This is the leg. This is the heart. This is the joint. This is the head.’ Thus, that monk discerns these elements when he examines his body as having the elements of earth, water, fire, and air. Thus, a monk contemplates [568b] the body and relaxes.
{: #p7}

8\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates this body as having orifices from which impurities flow. He’s like someone viewing a bamboo park or looking at a stand of reeds. Thus, the monk contemplates this body as having orifices from which impurities flow.
{: #p8}

9\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates a corpse that’s been dead for one night, two nights, three nights, four nights, five nights, six nights, or seven nights. The body is bloated, putrid, and impure. Again, he contemplates his own body as no different from it: ‘My body will not escape this fate.’ Suppose, again, a monk contemplates a corpse that’s been pecked and eaten by crows and owls or that’s been eaten by animals like tigers, wolves, jackals, and insects. Again, he examines his own body as no different from it: ‘My body will not be free of this fate.’ This is called a monk contemplating the body and relaxing.
{: #p9}

10\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates a corpse. Perhaps it’s half eaten and scattered on the ground, putrid and impure. Again, he contemplates his own body as no different from it: ‘My body will not be free of state.’
{: #p10}

11\. “Furthermore, he contemplates a corpse that’s only bones with its flesh gone and smeared with blood. Again, he contemplates this body and that body as having no difference. Thus, a monk contemplates this body.
{: #p11}

12\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates a corpse [that’s like] a bundle of wood wrapped in sinews. Again, he contemplates his own body and that one as having no difference. Thus, a monk contemplates this body.
{: #p12}

13\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates a corpse that has it’s bones and sinews separated and scattered in different places. Perhaps a hand bone and a leg bone are each in one place. Perhaps there’s a kneecap, a pelvic bone, a rump bone, an arm bone, a shoulder bone, a rib bone, a backbone, a neck bone, or a skull. Again, he contemplates his body and that one as having no difference: ‘I won’t escape this state; my body will also disintegrate.’ Thus, a monk contemplates the body and relaxes.
{: #p13}

14\. “Furthermore, a monk contemplates a corpse that’s white or white shell colored. Again, he contemplates his own body and that one as having no difference: ‘I’m won’t be free of this state.’ This is called a monk contemplating his own body.
{: #p14}

15\. “Furthermore, suppose a monk sees a corpse and perceives its bones and blueish contusions, none of which are desirable. Perhaps there’s ashes or dust that make it all the same color and indiscernible. Thus, a monk contemplates his own body, turning away bad thoughts and having no grief: ‘This body is impermanent and will become something that’s scattered.’ Thus, a monk contemplates his body internally, contemplates his body externally, and understands it as nothing at all.
{: #p15}

#### Contemplation of Feeling

16\. “How does a monk contemplate feeling as feeling internally? Here, when a monk has a pleasant feeling, then he is aware, ‘I’m having a pleasant feeling.’ When he has a painful feeling, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a painful experience.’ When he has a feeling that’s not pleasant or painful, [568c] then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a feeling that’s not pleasant or painful.’
{: #p16}

17\. “If he has a pleasant feeling from food, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a pleasant feeling from food.’ If he has a painful feeling from food, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a painful feeling from food.’ When he has a feeling that’s not pleasant or painful from food, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a feeling that’s not pleasant or painful from food.’
{: #p17}

18\. “If he has a pleasant feeling not from food, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a pleasant feeling not from food.’ If he has a painful feeling not from food, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a painful feeling not from food.’ When he has a feeling that’s not pleasant or painful and not from food, then he’s aware, ‘I’m having a feeling that’s not pleasant or painful and not from food.’ Thus, a monk contemplates feeling internally.
{: #p18}

19\. “Furthermore, when a monk has a pleasant feeling, at that point he isn’t having a painful feeling. At that point, he’s aware, ‘I’m experiencing a pleasant feeling.’ When he has a painful feeling, at that point he isn’t having a pleasant feeling. He’s aware, ‘I’m experiencing a painful feeling.’ If he has a feeling that’s not painful or pleasant, at that point there’s no pain or pleasure. He’s aware, ‘I’m experiencing a feeling that’s not painful or pleasant.’
{: #p19}

20\. “As with those states of coming together, he relaxes and observes the states of ending. Again, he contemplates [both] states of coming together and ending. Perhaps, again, he has a feeling that he can know and see directly in the present and reflect on its origin. Without depending on anything, he relaxes and doesn’t produce worldly perceptions. In that regard, he still is not frightened. Not being frightened, then he attains nirvāṇa: ‘Birth has ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I’m no longer subject to existence and know it as it really is.’
{: #p20}

21\. “Thus, a monk contemplates his own feelings internally, turning away confused thoughts and having no grief. He contemplates his own feelings externally and contemplates feelings internally and externally, turning away confused thoughts and having no grief. Thus, a monk contemplates feelings internally and externally.

#### Contemplation of Mind

22\. “How does a monk contemplate mental states as mind and relax? Here, a monk has a mental state with craving, and then he’s aware, ‘I have a mental state with craving.’ He has a mental state without craving, and he’s also aware, ‘I have a mental state without craving.’ He has a mental state with anger and then is aware, ‘I have a mental state with anger.’ He has a mental state without anger, and he’s also aware, ‘I have a mental state without anger.’ He has a mental state with delusion, and then he’s aware, ‘I have a mental state with delusion.’ He has a mental state without delusion, and he’s also aware, ‘I have a mental state without delusion.’
{: #p22}

23\. “He has a thought of craving, and he’s aware, ‘I have a thought of craving.’ He has a thought without craving, and he’s aware, ‘I have a thought without craving.’ Having a collected mind, he’s aware ‘I have a collected mind.’ Having an uncollected mind, he’s aware, ‘I have an uncollected mind.’ Having a confused mind, he’s aware, ‘I have a confused mind.’ Having an unconfused mind, he’s aware, ‘I have an unconfused mind.’ Having a distracted mind, he’s also aware, ‘I have a distracted mind.’ Having an undistracted mind, he’s aware, ‘I have an undistracted mind.’ Having a pervading mind, he’s aware, ‘I have a pervading mind.’ Having a mind that’s not pervading, he’s aware, ‘I have a mind that’s not pervading.’ Having a great mind, he’s aware, ‘I have a great mind.’ Without a great mind, he’s aware, ‘I’m without a great mind.’ Having a measureless mind, he’s aware, ‘I have a measureless mind.’ Without a measureless mind, he’s aware, ‘I’m without a measureless mind.’ Having a concentrated mind, he’s aware, ‘I have a concentrated mind.’ Without a concentrated mind, he’s aware, ‘I’m without a concentrated mind.’ With a mind yet to be liberated, he’s aware, ‘My mind has yet to be liberated.’ With a mind that has been liberated, he’s aware, ‘My mind has been liberated.’ Thus, a monk contemplates attributes of mind as a station of mind.
{: #p23}

24\. “He contemplates states of coming together, contemplates states of ending, and contemplates [both] states of coming together and ending. He contemplates the states of reflection and relaxes. He depends on nothing that can be known, can be seen, can be considered, and can’t be considered and doesn’t produce worldly perceptions. Once he doesn’t produce worldly perceptions, then he has no fear. Once he has no fear, then nothing remains. Once nothing remains, then he [enters] nirvāṇa: ‘Birth has ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I’m no longer subject to existence and know it as it really is.’
{: #p24}

25\. “Thus is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates mind as mind internally, turning away confused thoughts and having no grief. This is the station of mind that contemplates mind externally and contemplates mind internally and externally. Thus is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates mental attributes as mind.

#### Contemplation of Principles

26\. “What is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates the attributes of principles as principles? Here, a monk cultivates the awakening factor of mindfulness based on the lack of desire and cessation and abandons bad qualities. He cultivates the awakening factor of [discriminating] qualities, cultivates the awakening factor of  effort, cultivates the awakening factor of joy, cultivates the awakening factor of calm, cultivates the awakening factor of concentration, and cultivates the awakening factor of guarding based on contemplation, lack of desire, and cessation and abandons bad qualities. Thus is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates the attributes of principles as principles.
{: #p26}

27\. “Furthermore, a monk is liberated from craving and eliminates bad and unwholesome qualities. With perception and contemplation, he calms his thoughts. Delighting in the first meditation, he relaxes. Thus is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates the attributes of principles as principles.
{: #p27}

28\. “Furthermore, a monk abandons having perception and contemplation, and gives rise to inner joy. He focuses on a single thought and achieves the lack of perception and contemplation. Mindful, calm, joyous, and peaceful, he accomplishes the second meditation and relaxes.
{: #p28}

29\. “Furthermore, a monk abandons thought and cultivates guarding. Constantly aware of his own personal happiness that’s sought by the noble people. Guarded, mindful, and pure, he practices the third meditation. Thus is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates attributes of principles as principles.
{: #p29}

30\. “Furthermore, a monk abandons painful and pleasant mental states. No longer sad or joyous and without pain or pleasure, he’s guarded, mindful, and pure, delighting in the fourth meditation. Thus is a monk’s station of mind that contemplates attributes of principles as principles.
{: #p30}

31\. “Those practices are things that come together, things that end, and things that both come together and end as he relaxes. He then attains the station of mind regarding principles directly in the present. He can know and see and turns away from confused perceptions. He doesn’t depend on anything and doesn’t produce worldly perceptions. After he doesn’t produce perceptions, then he has no fear. After he has no fear, then birth ends. ‘The religious practice is established, and the task is accomplished. I’m no longer subject to existence and know it as it really is.’
{: #p31}

32\. “Monks, relying on this one entry to the path, sentient beings attain purity, part with grief, and no longer have perceptions of joy. They then obtain wisdom and attain realization of nirvāṇa. That is to say, they cease the five hindrances and cultivate the four stations of mind.”
{: #p32}

33\. The monks who heard what the Buddha taught then rejoiced and handed it down.
{: #p33}

### Notes
1. {:#n1} Parallels include [MN 10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10){: target="_blank"} and [MA 98](../02_madhyama/02_Lesser_Lands_and_Cities/09_Cause/MA_098.html){: target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 6 August 2020
{: .revised}

---