---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 2. The Sense Fields | 1-4 (188). Impermanent, Painful, Empty, and Not Self'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: index.html
next: SA2_1.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [2. The Sense Fields](index.html)
### 1-4 (188). Impermanent, Painful, Empty, and Not Self

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “You should correctly observe the eye to be [1] impermanent … [2] painful … [3] empty … [4] not self. Such observation is called right view. Because it’s correctly observed, disillusionment arises. Because disillusionment arises, one parts with delight and greed. I say the mind is correctly liberated by parting with delight and greed.
{: #p2}

3\. “Thus, regarding the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … one parts with delight and greed. Monks, I say the mind is correctly liberated by parting with delight and greed.
{: #p3}

4\. “Someone who’s mind is correctly liberated can declare about themselves: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{: #p4}

5\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p5}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This sūtra is parallel with [SN 35.156-7](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.156){:target="_blank"} and [SĀ 1.1-4](../01/SA1_1-4.html){:target="_blank"}. The next three sūtras are variants that follow this template while substituting the other three marks (“painful,” “empty,” and “not self”) for “impermanent.” [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 19 October 2022
{: .revised}

---