---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 2. The Sense Fields | 1. Impermanent'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: index.html
next: SA2_2.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [2. The Sense Fields](index.html)
### 1. Impermanent

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “You should correctly observe the eye to be impermanent. Such observation is called right view. Because it’s correctly observed, disillusionment arises. Because disillusionment arises, one parts with delight and greed [for the eye]. I say the mind is correctly liberated because of parting with delight and greed.
{: #p2}

3\. “Thus, regarding the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … one parts with delight and greed [for the mind]. Monks, I say the mind is correctly liberated because of parting with delight and greed.
{: #p3}

4\. “Someone who’s mind is correctly liberated can declare about themselves: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{: #p4}

5\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p5}

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This sūtra is parallel with [SN 35.156](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.156){:target="_blank"} and similar to [SN 35.155](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.155){:target="_blank"} and [157](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.157){:target="_blank"}. It also shares the same template as [SĀ 1.1](../01/SA1_1.html){:target="_blank"}. The next three sūtras are variants that follow this template while substituting the other three marks (“painful,” “empty,” and “not self”) for “impermanent.” [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 13 April 2021
{: .revised}

---
