---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 2. The Sense Fields | 41-48 (198). Rāhula (1-8)'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA2_40.html
next: SA2_49-56.html
---

<h1><a href='../index.html'>The Related Discourses</a></h1>
<h2><a href='index.html'>2. The Sense Fields</a></h2>

<table class="trans">
  <th class='ch'>（一九八） 羅睺羅</th>
  <th class='en'>41-48 (198). Rāhula (1-8)</th>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c7'>如是我聞：一時，佛住王舍城、耆闍崛山。</td>
    <td id='p1'>1. Thus I have heard:<sup id="ref1"><a href="#n1">1</a></sup> One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c8'>爾時，尊者羅睺羅往詣佛所。 稽首佛足，退住一面，白佛言： 「世尊，云何知、云何見我內識身及外一切相，令我、我所、我慢使繫著不生？」</td>
    <td id='p2'>2. It was then that Venerable Rāhula visited the Buddha. He bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to sit at one side, and said, “Bhagavān, how do I know and how do I see [41] my body of inner awareness<sup id="ref2"><a href="#n2">2</a></sup> … [42] the outer senses of forms, sounds, odors, flavors, touches, and ideas … [43] visual awareness … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and mental awareness … [44] visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and mental contact … [45] feelings that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and feelings that arise from mental contact … [46] notions that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and notions that arise from mental contact … [47] intentions that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and intentions that arise from mental contact … [48] cravings that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and cravings that arise from mental contact and all external signs such that binding attachments to self, what belongs to self, and the tendency of self conceit won’t arise?”</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c11'>爾時，世尊告羅睺羅： 「善哉，羅睺羅，能問如來甚深之義！」</td>
    <td id='p3'>3. The Bhagavān then told Rāhula, “It’s good, Rāhula, that you can ask the Tathāgata about such a profound subject!”</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c12'>佛告羅睺羅： 「眼若過去、若未來、若現在，若內、若外，若麁、若細，若好、若醜，若遠、若近，彼一切非我、非異我、不相在如實知。 耳、鼻、舌、身、意亦復如是。</td>
    <td id='p4'>4. The Buddha told Rāhula, “Whether it’s past, future, or present, internal or external, crude or fine, beautiful or ugly, or distant or near, the eye  … form … visual awareness … visual contact … feelings that arise from visual contact … notions that arise from visual contact … intentions that arise from visual contact … or cravings that arise from visual contact, it’s all not self, not different than self, and the two aren’t present in each other when truly known. <em>The ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are likewise.</em></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c15'>「羅睺羅，作如是知、如是見： 『我此識身及外一切相，令我、我所、我慢使繫著不生。』 羅睺羅，如是我、我所、我慢使繫著不生者。 羅睺羅，是名斷愛濁，見正無間等究竟苦邊。」</td>
    <td id='p5'>5. “Rāhula, you should thus know and see: ‘My body of inner awareness <em>and so on as above</em> and all external signs will not cause the arising of binding attachments to self, what belongs to self, and the tendency of self conceit.’ Rāhula, one prevents the arising of binding attachments to self, what belongs to self, and the tendency of self conceit in this way. Rāhula, this is called ending the defilement of craving and seeing right then the final end of suffering.”</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c19'>佛說此經已，尊者羅睺羅聞佛所說歡喜，奉行。</td>
    <td id='p6'>6. After the Buddha spoke this <em>sūtra</em>, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="ch" title='t99.2.50c21'>（如「內入處」，如是「外入處，色、聲、香、味、觸、法」，「眼識，耳、鼻、舌、身、意識」，「眼觸，耳、鼻、舌、身、意觸」，「眼觸生受，耳、鼻、舌、身、意觸生受」，「眼觸生想，耳、鼻、舌、身、意觸生想」，「眼觸生思，耳、鼻、舌、身、意觸生思」，「眼觸生愛，耳、鼻、舌、身、意觸生愛」亦如上說。）</td>
    <td><em>Like the inner senses, thus “the outer senses of forms, sounds, odors, flavors, touches, and ideas;” “visual awareness … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and mental awareness;” “visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and mental contact;” “feelings that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and feelings that arise from mental contact;” “notions that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and notions that arise from mental contact;” “intentions that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and intentions that arise from mental contact;” and “cravings that arise from visual contact … auditory … olfactory … gustatory … somatic … and cravings that arise from mental contact” were also taught as above.</em></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<hr/>

<h3 id="notes">Notes</h3>

<ol class="notes-list">
<li id="n1">This is <em>sūtra</em> no. 198 in the <cite>Taisho</cite> edition and nos. 219-26 in Yinshun (<a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T02n0099_p0050c07" target="_blank">T99.2.50c7-26</a>). This group of <em>sūtra</em>s appear to be variations of <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn18.21" target="_blank">SN 18.21-22</a>. They are also parallel to <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn22.91" target="_blank">SN 22.91-92</a> and <a href="../01/SA1_29.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.29</a> (which apply the same template to the five aggregates). [<a href="#ref1">back</a>]</li>
<li id="n2"><em>body of inner awareness.</em> C. 內識身. At face value, this expression would presumably mean the six kinds of awareness (visual to mental), but this would duplicate the third variant of this series of <em>sūtra</em>s (i.e., SĀ 2.43). The variant comment after this <em>sūtra</em> indicates that SĀ 2.41’s subject is actually the inner senses, and the next <em>sūtra</em> (SĀ 2.42) takes up the outer senses. If the expression 內識身 wasn’t paralleled in Pali, I would consider it a possible corruption of 內入處, but Rāhula’s question in both SN 18.21-22 reads P. <em>saviññāṇake kāye</em>. We should also note that the parallel passage in SĀ 1.29 reads “this body of awareness” (此識身) rather than “inner body of awareness” (內識身), suggesting that 內 may be the typo here. Given the non-standard nature of the expressions involved, I’ve left the C. stand as it is in my translation without amending it. [<a href="#ref2">back</a>]</li>
</ol>
<hr/>

<p class="translator">Translator: Charles Patton</p>
<p class='revised'>Last Revised: 17 March 2024</p>

<hr/>