---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. The Noble Path | 22. Wholesome and Unwholesome Aggregates'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_21.html
next: SA13_23.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 22. Wholesome and Unwholesome Aggregates

1\. Thus have I heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha stayed in the kingdom of Śrāvastī at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “The expression ‘unwholesome aggregate’ means the five hindrances. This is the correct explanation. What is the reason for that? It is an entirely unwholesome aggregate that’s called the five hindrances. What are the five? They are the hindrance of greed and the hindrances of anger, drowsiness, restlessness, and doubt.
{:#p2}

3\. “The expression ‘wholesome aggregate’ means the noble eightfold path. This is called the correct explanation. What is the reason for that? It is an entirely, fully, and purely wholesome aggregate that’s called the noble eightfold path. What are the eight? They are right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.”
{:#p3}

4\. After the Buddha had taught this discourse, the monks who heard what the Buddha had taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p4}

### Notes
1. {:#n1}Similar Pali passages are [*AN* 5.52](https://suttacentral.net/an5.52){:target="_blank"}, [*SN* 47.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.5){:target="_blank"}, and [*SN* 47.45](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.45){:target="_blank"}. *AN* 5.52 and *SN* 47.5 have only the description of the five coverings. *SN* 47.45 mentions only the aggregate of the wholesome but defines it as the four abodes of mindfulness. See also *EA* 32.2 and *SA* 7.9 and 12.22. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{:.translator}
Last Revised: 5 November 2019
{:.revised}

---