---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. The Noble Path | 30. What’s Rightly Considered'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_29.html
next: SA13_74.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 30. What’s Rightly Considered

<section><p id="en.1-1">Thus have I heard:<sup class="noteref">1</sup> One time, the Buddha stayed in the kingdom of Śrāvastī at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove.</p>


</section>
<section><p id="en.1-2">It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “Among inner things, I don’t see a single one that can cause the arising of a bad and unwholesome thing that’s yet to arise or to redouble one that has already arisen and make it grow like what’s not rightly considered. Monks, something that’s not rightly considered causes wrong view to occur that’s yet to occur and to redouble it when it has already occurred. <em>Thus wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration  are also explained.</em></p>


</section>
<section><p id="en.1-3">“Monks, among inner things, I do not see a single one that prevents the arising of a bad and unwholesome thing that’s yet to arise or to cease a bad and unwholesome thing that has already arisen like what’s rightly considered.  Monks, something rightly considered prevents wrong view from arising that’s yet to arise and ceases it when it has already arisen. <em>Like wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration are thus explained.</em>”</p>


</section>
<section><p id="en.1-4">After the Buddha had taught this discourse, the monks who heard what the Buddha had taught rejoiced and handed it down.</p>


</section><h2>Endnotes</h2>
<ol><li>This sutra is similar to <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn45.83" target="_blank"><em>SN</em> 45.83</a> and <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn45.90" target="_blank">90</a>, but it addresses the wrong factors of the noble path.</li></ol><section class="footer">
<h5>Translator: Charles Patton<br/>Last Revised: 9-11-2019</h5>
<hr/>