---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. The Noble Path | 28. The Other Shore (3)'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_27.html
next: SA13_29.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 28. The Other Shore (3)

<section><p id="en.1-1">Thus have I heard:<sup class="noteref">1</sup> One time, the Buddha stayed in the kingdom of Śrāvastī at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove.</p>


</section>
<section><p id="en.1-2">The Venerable Ānanda then came to visit the Buddha, prostrated at his feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. He said, “Bhagavān, there is what is not the other shore and what is the other shore. Bhagavān, what is not the other shore, and what is the other shore?”</p>


</section>
<section><p id="en.1-3">The Buddha told Ānanda, “Wrong view is not the other shore, but right view is the other shore. Wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration are not the other shore, but right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration are the other shore.”</p>


</section>
<section><p id="en.1-4">The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:</p>


</section>
<section>
<ol  id="en.5" start="5" class="verse en">
<li class="en">

“Rare are the people who can<br/>

Cross over to the other shore;<br/>

Everyone else in the world<br/>

Wander around on this shore.<br/>

</li>
</ol>



</section>
<section>
<ol  id="en.6" start="6" class="verse en">
<li class="en">

Of this right teaching and discipline,<br/>

There are some who can follow it;<br/>

They are the ones who can cross over<br/>

That difficult ford of birth-and-death.”<br/>

</li>
</ol>



</section>
<section><p id="en.1-7">After the Buddha had taught this discourse, the monks who heard what the Buddha had taught rejoiced and handed it down.</p>


</section><h2>Endnotes</h2>
<ol><li>This sutra is reconstituted from a description after <a href="SA13_26.html" target="_blank"><em>SA</em> 13.26</a> at 200b11. It’s parallel with <a href="https://suttacentral.net/an10.117" target="_blank"><em>AN</em> 10.117</a> and <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn45.34" target="_blank"><em>SN</em> 45.34</a>, but the Pali doesn’t have this interlocutor as a variant.</li></ol><section class="footer">
<h5>Translator: Charles Patton<br/>Last Revised: 9-11-2019</h5>
<hr/>