---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. The Noble Path | 15 (761). Correct Men and Great Men'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_14.html
next: SA13_16.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 15 (761). Correct Men and Great Men

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “I will explain the correct man and the great man.[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2} Listen closely and consider it well. What is a correct man? It means a correct man’s accomplishment of right view … right intention … right speech … right action … right method … right mindfulness … accomplishment of right samādhi. This is called a correct man. What is the great man? It means the great man’s accomplishment of right view … right intention … right speech … right action … right method … right mindfulness … accomplishment of right samādhi. This is called a great man.”
{:#p2}

3\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p3}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1}This sūtra is reconstituted according to a variant note that follows [SĀ 13.14](SA13_14.html){:target="_blank"}, which substitutes “correct man” and “great man” for “trainee” and “adept.” [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2}<em>Correct man and great man</em>. These are literal translations of C. 正士 and 大士. They were likely translations of S. <em>sat-puruṣa</em> and <em>mahā-puruṣa</em>. [\[back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 1 November 2022
{: .revised}

---