---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. Factors of the Noble Path | 75 (785). The Eightfold Path (2)'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_74.html
next: ../14/index.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 75 (785). The Eightfold Path (2)

1\. Thus have I heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks … <em>like [SĀ 13.74](SA13_74.html){: target="_blank"} with this difference:</em> “What’s right view? There are two kinds of right view: Right view that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right view that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p2}

3\. “What is right view that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? If someone’s view is that there’s generosity, there’s the teaching … knowing there are arhats in the world … ‘won’t subject to a later existence.’ This is called the worldly right view that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and leads to a good destiny.
{: #p3}

4\. “What is right view that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. When associated with uncontaminated reflection, it discriminates qualities, discerns, inquires, becomes aware and intelligent, and rouses investigation. This is called the right view that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p4}

5\. “What is right intention? There are two kinds of right intention: Right intention that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right intention that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p5}

6\. “What is right intention that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? Right intention is thought of renunciation, thought without anger, and thought that’s not harmful. This is called right intention that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p6}

7\. “What is right intention that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. When associated with uncontaminated reflection, it’s the mental states of discernment, definite resolve, and measured intent. This is called right intention that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p7}

8\. “What is right speech? There are two kinds of right speech: Right speech that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right speech that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p8}

9\. “What’s right speech that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? This right speech is free of false speech, duplicity, harsh words, and fancy speech. This is called right speech that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p9}

10\. “What’s right speech that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. They rid themselves of desire for wrong livelihood, the four verbal bad actions, and the other verbal bad actions. Secluded from them, they are uncontaminated, isolated, unattached, resolute, and collected. They don’t transgress or act freely given the occasion and don’t surpass their limits. This is called right speech that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p10}

11\. “What’s right action? There are two kinds of right action: Right action that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right action that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p11}

12\. “What’s right action that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? It’s free of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct. This is called right action that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p12}

13\. “What’s right action that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. They rid themselves of desire for wrong livelihood, the three bad physical actions, and the numerous other physical bad deeds. They’re uncontaminated, unattached to pleasure, resolute, and collected. They don’t transgress or act freely given the occasion and don’t surpass their limits. This is called right action that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p13}

14\. “What’s right livelihood? There are two kinds of right livelihood: Right livelihood that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right livelihood that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p14}

15\. “What is right livelihood that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? It’s pursuing clothing, food, bedding, and medicines for illnesses in ways according to Dharma and not contrary to it. This is called right livelihood that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p15}

16\. “What’s right livelihood that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. Regarding wrong livelihoods, they’re uncontaminated, unattached to pleasure, resolute, and collected. They don’t transgress or act freely given the occasion and don’t surpass their limits. This is called right livelihood that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p16}

17\. “What’s right method? There are two kinds of right method: Right method that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right method that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p17}

18\. “What’s right method that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? It’s desire, effort, method, initiation, resolute establishment, and the ability to work diligently. These mental states are collected, constant, and continuous. This is called right method that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p18}

19\. “What’s right method that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. When associated with uncontaminated recollection, it’s the mental states of desire, effort, method, diligence, initiation, resolute establishment, and the ability to work diligently. These mental states are collected, constant, and continuous. This is called right method that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p19}

20\. “What’s right mindfulness? There are two kinds of right mindfulness: Right mindfulness that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right mindfulness that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p20}

21\. “What’s right mindfulness that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? Suppose mindfulness, following mindfulness, deep mindfulness, and recollection are not false or vacant. This is called right mindfulness that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p21}

22\. “What’s right mindfulness that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. When associated with uncontaminated reflection, suppose that mindfulness, following mindfulness, deep mindfulness, and recollection are not false or vacant. This is called right mindfulness that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p22}

23\. “What’s right <em>samādhi</em>? There are two kinds of right <em>samādhi</em>: Right <em>samādhi</em> that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny, and right <em>samādhi</em> that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.
{: #p23}

24\. “What’s right <em>samādhi</em> that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny? Suppose the mind abides unconfused, undisturbed, collected, tranquil, in <em>samādhi</em>, and single-minded. This is called right <em>samādhi</em> that’s worldly, conventional, contaminated, acquired, and which leads to a good destiny.
{: #p24}

25\. “What’s right <em>samādhi</em> that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering? It’s the noble disciple’s reflection on suffering as suffering … it’s formation … it’s cessation … their reflection on the path as path. When associated with uncontaminated reflection, it’s abiding unconfused, undistracted, collected, tranquil, in <em>samādhi</em>, and single-minded. This is called right <em>samādhi</em> that’s noble, transcendent, uncontaminated, unacquired, and which correctly ends suffering and leads to the limit of suffering.”
{: #p25}

26\. After the Buddha spoke this <em>sūtra</em>, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p26}

---

### Notes
1. {:#n1} This <em>sūtra</em> is parallel with [MN 117](https://suttacentral.net/mn117){: target="_blank"} and MĀ 189. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 10 November 2023
{: .revised}

---