---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. The Noble Path | 20-21 (766). The Arising of the Noble Path'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_19.html
next: SA13_21.html
---
# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 20-21 (766). The Arising of the Noble Path

1\. Thus have I heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “Suppose a monk’s right view is pure, cleansed, without fault, and free of afflictions. This never happens except when he’s disciplined by a buddha (12.20) <em>or</em> a sugata (12.21) … [right samādhi is pure, cleansed, without fault, and free of afflictions. This never happens except when he’s disciplined by a Buddha.]
{:#p2}

3\. “Suppose a monk’s right view is pure, cleansed, without fault, and free of afflictions. This can only happen when he’s [disciplined by a buddha <em>or</em> a sugata … right samādhi is pure, cleansed, without fault, and free of afflictions. This can only happen when he’s disciplined by a buddha.]” [\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2}
{:#p3}

4\. After the Buddha spoke this <em>sūtra</em>, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p4}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1}This sūtra is similar to [SN 45.15](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.15){:target="_blank"} and [16](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.16){:target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2} The translator has abbreviated the sūtra substantially. I’ve partially reconstituted it to make it more intelligible. The full recitation would make the same statements for all eight factors of the noble path. [\[back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{:.translator}
Last Revised: 25 November 2022
{:.revised}

---