---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. The Noble Path | 14-15 (761). Trainees and Adepts'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_13.html
next: SA13_16.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 14-15 (761). Trainees and Adepts

1\. Thus have I heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “I will explain the trainee and the adept (13.14) <em>or</em> the correct man and the great man[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2} (13.15). Listen closely and consider it well. What is a trainee <em>or</em> correct man? It means their accomplishment of right view … right intention … right speech … right action … right method … right mindfulness … accomplishment of right samādhi. This is called a trainee <em>or</em> correct man. What is an adept <em>or</em> great man? It means their accomplishment of right view … right intention … right speech … right action … right method … right mindfulness … accomplishment of right samādhi. This is called an adept <em>or</em> great man.”
{:#p2}

3\. After the Buddha spoke this <em>sūtra</em>, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p3}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} These two versions of the same <em>sūtra</em> seem similar to [SN 45.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.13){:target="_blank"}, but the Pali <em>sutta</em> only mentions the trainee. [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2}<em>Correct man and great man</em>. These are literal translations of C. 正士 and 大士. They were likely translations of S. <em>sat-puruṣa</em> and <em>mahā-puruṣa</em>. [\[back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 10 November 2023
{: .revised}

---