---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. Factors of the Noble Path | 2. Forerunners'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_1.html
next: SA13_3.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 2. Forerunners

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “When ignorance is the first sign, then it gives rise to bad and unwholesome things. The lack of conscience and modesty then arises as a result. After the lack of conscience and modesty arises, wrong view arises as a result. After wrong view arises, that can produce wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong method, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration.
{:#p2}

3\. “If producing insight is the first sign, it gives rise to good things. Conscience and modesty then arise. After conscience and modesty arise, they can give rise to right view. After right view arises, that produces right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right method, right mindfulness, and right concentration, and they are produced in that sequence. After right concentration is produced, the noble disciple attains correct liberation from desire, anger, and delusion. After the noble disciple thus attains liberation, he gains this correct knowledge and vision: ‘My births have been ended; the religious practice has been established; and the task has been done. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{:#p3}

4\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p4}

### Notes
1. {:#n1} This discourse is a close parallel with [SN 45.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.55){: target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 14 September 2020
{: .revised}

---
