---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 13. Factors of the Noble Path | 6 (753). Immortality'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA13_5.html
next: SA13_7.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [13. Factors of the Noble Path](index.html)
### 6 (753). Immortality

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that a monk named Ariṣṭa went to the Buddha, prostrated at his feet, and withdrew to sit at one side. He said to the Buddha, “Bhagavān, there’s the expression ‘immortal.’[\[2\]](#n1){:#ref2} What is it that’s called ‘immortal’?”
{:#p2}

Buddha told Ariṣṭa, “’Immortal’ is the name of a realm, but I take it to be the end of the contaminants of existence. That’s a clear explanation of this name.”

3\. The monk Ariṣṭa said to the Buddha, “Bhagavān, isn’t there a path and steps to attaining immortality when cultivated and cultivated often?”
{:#p3}

The Buddha addressed the monk, “There is. It’s known as the noble eightfold path, which is right view … right samādhi.”

4\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p4}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This sūtra is partially parallel with [SN 45.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.7){: target="_blank"}, which contains a question about the “deathless” and equates it with the end of desire, anger, and delusion. [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2}*immortal*. C. 甘露, P. *amata*, S. *amṛta*. The Chinese translates S. *amṛta* as ‘sweet dew,’ which was a mythical substance in Chinese legends. *Amṛta* was probably the inspiration for the Greek myth of ambrosia, as both were the food of the gods that gave them immortality. [\[back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 1 November 2022
{: .revised}

---