---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 1. Impermanent'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: index.html
next: SA1_2.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 1. Impermanent

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “You should observe that form is impermanent. Such observation then is right view.[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2} Correctly observing it gives rise to disillusionment. Being disillusioned, delight and greed [for form] will end. When delight and greed [for form] have ended, that’s said to be the mind’s liberation.
{: #p2}

3\. “Thus, observe that feeling … perception … volition … consciousness is impermanent. Such observation then is right view. Correctly observing it gives rise to disillusionment. Being disillusioned, delight and greed [for consciousness] will end. When delight and greed [for consciousness] have ended, that’s said to be the mind’s liberation.
{:#p3}

4\. “Thus, monks, someone wanting to realize the mind's liberation for themselves then can realize it: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{:#p4}

5\. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
{: #p5}

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This sūtra is parallel with [SN 22.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.12){:target="_blank"} and [SN 22.51](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.51){:target="_blank"}. The next three sūtras are variants that follow this template while substituting the other three marks (“painful,” “empty,” and “not self”) for “impermanent.” [\[back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2} *right view*. Yinshun amends *correct observation* to *right view* in this sūtra citing the nearly identical passages at [SN 22.51](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.51){:target="_blank"} and SĀ 2.1. [\[back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 6 April 2021
{: .revised}

---
