---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 8 (5). Not Knowing (3)'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA1_7.html
next: SA1_9.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 8 (5). Not Knowing (3)

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “When one doesn’t know and understand form and doesn’t become free of desire for it, their mind isn’t liberated. Their mind not being liberated, they can’t stop suffering. Thus, when one doesn’t know and understand feeling … conception … volition … consciousness and doesn’t become free of desire for it, their mind isn’t liberated, and then they can’t stop suffering.
{:#p2}

3\. “Monks, if someone knows and understands form and becomes free of desire for it, their mind is liberated, and then they can stop suffering. Thus, if someone knows and understands feeling … conception … volition … consciousness and becomes free of desire for it, their mind is liberated, and then they can stop suffering.”
{:#p3}

4\. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
{:#p4}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This <em>sūtra</em> is a variant of the previous two and next <em>sūtra</em>. As a group, they are parallel to <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn22.24" target="_blank">SN 22.24</a>, and this <em>sūtra</em> is parallel with <a href="../02/SA2_8.html" target="_blank">SĀ 2.8</a>.<br/>
The <cite>Taisho</cite> version of this <em>sūtra</em> copies content from <a href="SA1_10.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.10 (7)</a> into its beginning. I’ve followed Yinshun’s lead in ignoring this material as spurious on two grounds. First, the summary verse for this group of <em>sūtra</em>s only mentions one <em>sūtra</em> on delight. Second, <a href="../02/SA2_8.html" target="_blank">SĀ 2.8</a> would be a strong parallel if we deleted the added material. This would then maintain the pattern of SĀ 1.1-10 corresponding closely to SĀ 2.1-10. It would appear to be a case of a copyist losing their place and copying a few lines from the wrong <em>sūtra</em>. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 10 December 2023
{: .revised}

---