---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 98-109 (68). Teaching the Six Sense Fields'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA1_86-97.html
next: SA1_110-112.html
---

<h1><a href='../index.html'>The Related Discourses</a></h1>
<h2><a href='index.html'>1. The Aggregates</a></h2>

<table class="trans">
  <th class='ch'>（六八） 說六入處</th>
  <th class='en'>98-109 (68). Teaching the Six Sense Fields</th>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a6'>如是我聞： 一時，佛住舍衛國、祇樹、給孤獨園。</td>
    <td id='p1'>1. Thus I have heard:<sup id="ref1"><a href="#n1">1</a></sup> One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a7'>爾時，世尊告諸比丘： 「常當修習方便禪思，內寂其心⋯如實觀察。 云何如實觀察？ 如實知： 『此色』、『此色集』、『此色滅』。 『此受⋯想⋯行⋯識』、『此識集』、『此識滅』。</td>
    <td id='p2'>2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “You must always cultivate the methods of meditating and having an inner peace in your heart. [Why is that? A monk who has always cultivated the methods of meditating and had inner peace in his heart] truly [98] examines … [99] discerns … [100] discerns in various ways … [101] knows … [102] knows in detail … [103] knows in various ways … [104] is familiar with, [105] cultivates, [106] cultivates often, [107] enters, [108] contacts, and [109] realizes something.<sup id="ref2"><a href="#n2">2</a></sup> What does he truly examine? He truly knows: ‘This is form.’ ‘This is form’s formation.’ ‘This is form’s cessation.’ ‘This is feeling … conception … volition … awareness.’ ‘This is the formation of awareness.’ ‘This is the cessation of awareness.’</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a10'>「云何色集，受⋯想⋯行⋯識集？ 緣眼及色眼識生。 三事和合生觸。 緣觸生受，緣受生愛⋯乃至⋯純大苦聚生。 是名色集。 如是，緣耳⋯鼻⋯舌⋯身⋯意⋯ 緣意及法生意識。 三事和合生觸。 緣觸生受，緣受生愛⋯如是乃至⋯純大苦聚生。 是名色集，受⋯想⋯行⋯識集。</td>
    <td id='p3'>3. “What is the formation of form … feeling … conception … volition … the formation of awareness? Visual awareness arises dependent on the eye and forms. These three things unite to produce contact. Feeling arises dependent on contact, craving arises dependent on feeling … <em>up to</em> … the whole mass of suffering arises. This is called form’s formation. In this way, dependent on the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … Mental awareness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. These three things unite to produce contact. Feeling arises dependent on contact, craving arises dependent on feeling … <em>up to</em> … the whole mass of suffering arises. This is called the formation of form … feeling … conception … volition … the formation of awareness.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a15'>「云何色滅，受⋯想⋯行⋯識滅？ 緣眼及色眼識生。 三事和合生觸。 觸滅則受滅⋯乃至⋯純大苦聚滅。 如是耳⋯鼻⋯舌⋯身⋯意⋯ 緣意及法意識生。 三事和合生觸。 觸滅則受滅。 受滅⋯乃至⋯純大苦聚滅。 是名色滅，受⋯想⋯行⋯識滅。</td>
    <td id='p4'>4. “What is the cessation of form … feeling … conception … volition … the cessation of awareness? Visual awareness arises dependent on the eye and forms. These three things unite to produce contact. When contact ceases, then feeling ceases … <em>up to</em> … the whole mass of suffering ceases. In this way, the ear … nose … tongue … body … mind … Mental awareness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. These three things unite to produce contact. When contact ceases, then feeling ceases. When feeling ceases … <em>up to</em> … the whole mass of suffering ceases. This is called the cessation of form … feeling … conception … volition … the cessation of awareness.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a20'>「是故，比丘，常當修習方便禪思，內寂其心⋯」</td>
    <td id='p5'>5. “Therefore, monks, you must always cultivate the methods of meditating and having an inner peace in your heart. [Monks, abide in meditating and having inner peace in your heart. Be diligent in these methods, and truly examine … <em>up to</em> … realize these things.]”<sup id="ref3"><a href="#n3">3</a></sup></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a21'>佛說此經已，諸比丘聞佛所說歡喜，奉行。</td>
    <td id='p6'>6. After the Buddha spoke this <em>sūtra</em>, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a23'>（如觀察⋯乃至⋯作證十二經，亦如是廣說。）</td>
    <td>(<em>Like [98] “examine,” [likewise is [99] “discern,” [100] “discern in various ways,” [101] “know,” [102] “know in detail,” [103] “know in various ways,” [104] “be familiar with,” [105] “cultivate,” [106] “cultivate often,” [107] “enter,” [108] “contact,” and] [109] “realize” are twelve </em>sūtra<em>s recited in full.<sup id="ref4"><a href="#n4">4</a></sup></em>)</td>
  </tr>
<tr>
  <td class='ch' title='t99.2.18a24'></td>
  <td class='subheading'>Summary Verse</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td title='t99.2.18a24'><ul class='verse'>
    <li class='ch'>受與生及樂、<br/>
    亦說六入處，<br/>
    一一十二種<br/>
    禪定三昧經。</li>
  </ul></td>
  <td><ul class='verse'>
    <li>[62-73] Feeling, [74-85] birth, [86-97] delight,<br/>
    And [98-109] teaching the six sense fields<br/>
    Are each twelve <em>sūtra</em>s<br/>
    On meditation and <em>samādhi</em>.</li>
  </ul></td>
</tr>
</table>

<hr/>

<h3 id="notes">Notes</h3>

<ol class="notes-list">
<li id="n1"><p>This is <em>sūtra</em> no. 68 in the <cite>Taisho</cite> edition and nos. 98-109 in Yinshun (<a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T02n0099_p0018a06" target="_blank">T99.2.18a6-25</a>, <a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/Y30n0030_p0110a01" target="_blank">Y30.110a1-13</a>). The basic template is similar to <a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn22.5" target="_blank">SN 22.5</a>-<a href="https://suttacentral.net/sn22.6" target="_blank">6</a>. However, in this case, that template has been replicated with twelve different synonymous verbs for understanding the nature of the aggregates.</p>
<p>This pattern is repeated with <a href="SA1_62-73.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.62-73 (65)</a>, <a href="SA1_74-85.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.74-85 (66)</a>, and <a href="SA1_86-97.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.86-97 (67)</a>. Each of these sets of twelve <em>sūtra</em>s change the subject that’s understood and replicate the template with the same twelve synonyms for understanding. Thus, four variations are multiplied in twelve ways to arrive at a total of 48 <em>sūtra</em>s. [<a href="#ref1">back</a>]</p></li>
<li id="n2"><p>It seems that a portion of this introductory statement has been lost in the original Chinese. I’ve reconstructed it based on the previous three groups of <em>sūtra</em>s that share the same introduction. [<a href="#ref2">back</a>]</p></li>
<li id="n3"><p>I’ve reconstructed this conclusion based on <a href="SA1_62-73.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.62-73</a>, which has a full conclusion that follows a format found in many EBTs that draws a general moral or principle from the proceeding lecture. Here, it has been abbreviated to the initial statement only. [<a href="#ref3">back</a>]</p></li>
<li id="n4"><p>This translator’s note has also been abbreviated. I’ve expanded it back to the original list of alternate verbs found in the note to <a href="SA1_62-73.html" target="_blank">SĀ 1.62-73</a> that began this series of <em>sūtra</em>s. [<a href="#ref4">back</a>]</p></li>
</ol>
<hr/>

<p class="translator">Translator: Charles Patton</p>
<p class='revised'>Last Revised: 10 February 2026</p>

<hr/>