---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 3. Empty'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA1_2.html
next: SA1_4.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 3. Empty

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “You must observe that form is empty. Such observation then is right view. Correctly observing it, you’ll become disillusioned. Being disillusioned, your delight and greed for it will end. When your delight and greed for it have ended, that’s said to be the mind’s liberation.
{: #p2}

3\. “Thus observe that feeling … perception … volition … consciousness is empty. Such observation then is right view. Correctly observing it, you’ll become disillusioned. Being disillusioned, your delight and greed for it will end. When your delight and greed for it have ended, that’s said to be the mind’s liberation.
{:#p3}

4\. “Thus, monks, if your mind is liberated and you want to realize it yourself, then you will realize this: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{:#p4}

5\. The monks who heard what the Buddha taught then rejoiced and approved.
{: #p5}

### Notes
1. {:#n1} This sūtra has been reconstituted following the description of variant sūtras found at *T* 99.1a14, which replaces ‘impermanent’ in SĀ 1.1 with ‘empty.’ It’s parallel with [SN 22.51](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.51){:target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 17 September 2020
{: .revised}

---