---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 4 (1). Not Self'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: SA1_3.html
next: SA1_5.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 4 (1). Not Self

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “One should observe that form is not self. Observing it in this way is right view. Correctly observing it gives rise to disillusionment. When someone is disillusioned, delight and greed end. When delight and greed end, I say their mind is liberated.
{: #p2}

3\. “Thus observe that feeling … conception … volition … consciousness is not self. Observing it in this way is right view. Correctly observing it gives rise to disillusionment. When someone is disillusioned, delight and greed end. When delight and greed end, I say their mind is liberated.
{:#p3}

4\. “Thus, monks, someone who wants to realize the mind’s liberation for themselves can then realize: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{:#p4}

5\. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
{: #p5}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This sūtra has been reconstituted following the description of variant sūtras found at T99.1a14, which replaces “impermanent” in SĀ 1.1 with “not self.” [SN 22.14](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.14){:target="_blank"}, [SN 22.51](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.51){:target="_blank"}, and [SĀ 2.4](../02/SA2_4.html){:target="_blank"} are close parallels. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 17 October 2022
{: .revised}

---