---
layout: default
title: 'The Medium Discourses | Chapter 7: King Dīrghāyu | 74. Eight Thoughts'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: MA_073.html
next: MA_075.html
---

# [The Medium Discourses](index.html)
## Chapter 7: King Dīrghāyu
### 74. Eight Thoughts

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){: #ref1} One time, the Buddha traveled to Bharga and stayed at Mṛgadāva Park in Bhīṣaṇikā Grove of Śuśumāragiri.
{: #p1}

#### The Eight Thoughts of a Great Man

2\. It was then that Venerable Aniruddha was staying in Cedi at Waterside Grove. At the time, Venerable Aniruddha was staying in a peaceful place sitting in reflection. In his mind, he thought, “The path comes from having no desires; it’s not attained by having desires. The path comes from knowing what’s enough; it’s not obtained by lacking satisfaction. The path comes from seclusion; it’s not obtained by enjoying company, living with company, or joining company. The path comes from diligence; it’s not obtained by indolence. The path comes from right mindfulness; it’s not obtained by wrong mindfulness. The path comes from a concentrated mind; it’s not obtained by a distracted mind. The path comes from wisdom; it’s not obtained by foolishness.”
{: #p2}

3\. Thereupon, the Bhagavān knew that thought, that reflection, and that volition in Venerable Aniruddha’s mind using his knowledge of other minds. Knowing it, the Bhagavān then entered that form of <em>samādhi</em>. With that form of <em>samādhi</em>, the Bhagavān thus disappeared from Mṛgadāva Park in Bharga and appeared standing before Venerable Aniruddha in Cedi at Waterside Grove in the time it takes a strong man to flex his arm.
{: #p3}

4\. The Bhagavān then roused from that <em>samādhi</em> and praised Venerable Aniruddha. “Good, Aniruddha, good! You were in a peaceful place sitting in reflection. In your mind, you thought, ‘The path comes from having no desires; it’s not attained by having desires. The path comes from knowing what’s enough; it’s not obtained by lacking satisfaction. The path comes from seclusion; it’s not obtained by enjoying company, living with company, or joining company. The path comes from diligence; it’s not obtained by indolence. The path comes from right mindfulness; it’s not obtained by wrong mindfulness. The path comes from a concentrated mind; it’s not obtained by a distracted mind. The path comes from wisdom; it’s not obtained by foolishness.’
{: #p4}

5\. “Aniruddha, you could accept an additional eighth thought of a great man from the Tathāgata. Accepting it, reflect that the path comes from non-frivolity, enjoying non-frivolity, and practicing non-frivolity; it’s not obtained by frivolity, enjoying frivolity, or practicing frivolity. Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man, you’ll surely be able to be secluded from desires and secluded from bad and unskillful things … you’ll accomplish and dwell in the fourth meditation.
{: #p5}

#### Eight Similes about the Eight Thoughts

6\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, you’ll be like a king or a king’s minister with a fine hamper full of various robes. Wishing to put them on during the morning, they choose which to put on. Wishing to put on clothes during the day and in the evening, they put them on, doing so freely as they like. Aniruddha, you’ll be likewise. Obtaining a discarded robe and considering it the best clothing, your mind will lack desire by practicing this way.
{: #p6}

7\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, you’ll be like a king or a king’s minister with a fine kitchen with a variety of pure, sublime, and delicious dishes. Aniruddha, you’ll be likewise. Always soliciting alms and considering it the best meal, your mind will lack desire by practicing this way.
{: #p7}

8\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, you’ll be like a king or a king’s minister with a fine residence, mansion, or palace. Aniruddha, you’ll be likewise. Stopping under a tree and considering it the best residence, your mind will lack desire by practicing this way.
{: #p8}

9\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, you’ll be like a king or a king’s minister with a fine seat, prepared with a wool carpet or blanket, covered by fine brocades or fine silk gauze, and with a fabric-covered pair of heads with comfortable cushions …  Aniruddha, you’ll be likewise. Considering a seat of grass or leaves to be the best seat, your mind will lack desire by practicing this way.
{: #p9}

10\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, then were you to travel east, you’d surely be happy and without any troubles. If you were to travel south, west, or north, you’d surely be happy without any troubles.
{: #p10}

11\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, then even if I didn’t say you dwell in good qualities, how could I say you’d decline? You’ll simply develop good qualities day and night and not decline.
{: #p11}

12\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, you’ll surely obtain one of two fruits: Either you’ll attain ultimate knowledge in the present life, or you’ll become a non-returner with remainder.
{: #p12}

13\. “Aniruddha, if you accomplish these eight thoughts of a great man and also attain these four progressive mental states, dwell happily in the present life, and attain them easily and not with difficulty, then afterwards you’ll spend the summer retreat in Cedi at Waterside Grove.”
{: #p13}

#### The Buddha Explains the Eight Thoughts

14\. It was then that the Bhagavān taught Dharma for Venerable Aniruddha. Encouraging, rousing, and making him rejoice, he taught the Dharma for him with measureless methods. Having encouraged, roused, and made him rejoice, he entered that form of <em>samādhi</em>. With that form of <em>samādhi</em>, the Bhagavān thus disappeared from the Waterside Grove in Cedi and appeared standing at Mṛgadāva Park in Bharga in the time it takes a strong man to flex his arm.
{: #p14}

15\. At that moment, Venerable Ānanda was holding a fan and attending the Buddha. Thereupon, the Bhagavān roused from <em>samādhi</em>, turned to him, and said, “Ānanda, if there are monks traveling to Mṛgadāva Park in Bharga, send them all to assemble at the meeting hall. Once they’ve assembled at the meeting hall, come back and tell me.”
{: #p15}

16\. Accepting the Bhagavān’s instruction, Venerable Ānanda bowed his head at his feet as homage and then went to announce the order: “Any monks traveling to Mṛgadāva Park in Bharga are all to assemble at the meeting hall.”
{: #p16}

17\. Once they had assembled at the meeting hall, he came back to the Buddha, bowed his head at his feet, and withdrew to sit to one side. He said, “Bhagavān, any monks who’ve traveled to Mṛgadāva Park in Bharga have all been sent to assembly at the meeting hall. May the Bhagavān know the time is right.”
{: #p17}

18\. Thereupon, the Bhagavān led Venerable Ānanda to the meeting hall. He prepared a seat in front of the assembled monks and sat down. After sitting, he addressed them, “Monks, now I will explain the eight thoughts of a great man for you. All of you, listen closely, and consider it well!” The monks then accepted the teaching and listened.
{: #p18}

19\. The Buddha said, “The eight thoughts of a great man are these: ‘The path comes from having no desires; it’s not attained by having desires. The path comes from knowing what’s enough; it’s not obtained by lacking satisfaction. The path comes from seclusion; it’s not obtained by enjoying company, living with company, or joining company. The path comes from diligence; it’s not obtained by indolence. The path comes from right mindfulness; it’s not obtained by wrong mindfulness. The path comes from a concentrated mind; it’s not obtained by a distracted mind. The path comes from wisdom; it’s not obtained by foolishness. The path comes from non-frivolity, enjoying non-frivolity, and practicing non-frivolity; it’s not obtained by frivolity, enjoying frivolity, or practicing frivolity.’
{: #p19}

20\. “How does the path come from having no desires and isn’t obtained by having desires? A monk attains the lack of desires. Knowing himself to have attained the lack of desires, he doesn’t let other people know, ‘I have no desires.’ He attains knowing what’s enough … seclusion … diligence … right mindfulness … a concentrated mind … wisdom … non-frivolity. Knowing that he has attained non-frivolity, he doesn’t let other people know, ‘I have no frivolity.’ This is how the path comes from having no desires and isn’t obtained by having desires.
{: #p20}

21\. “How does the path come from knowing what’s enough and isn’t obtained by the lack of satisfaction? A monk practices knowing what’s enough. He takes clothes to cover himself and takes food to nourish his body. This is how the path comes from knowing what’s enough and not obtained by a lack of satisfaction.
{: #p21}

22\. “How does the path come from seclusion and isn’t obtained by enjoying company, living with company, or joining company? A monk practices seclusion and accomplishes two seclusions: physical and mental seclusion. This is how the path comes from seclusion and isn’t obtained by enjoying company, living with company, or joining company.
{: #p22}

23\. “How does the path come from diligence and isn’t obtained by indolence? It means a monk always conducts himself with energy. He stops bad and unskillful things and cultivates good things. He constantly motivates himself to be focused and resolute, to make roots of goodness, and not to abandon the effort. This is how the path comes from diligence and isn’t obtained by indolence.
{: #p23}

24\. “How does the path come from right mindfulness and isn’t obtained by wrong mindfulness? A monk contemplates inner body as body … contemplates inner feelings … mind … principles as principles. This is how the path comes from right mindfulness and isn’t obtained by wrong mindfulness.
{: #p24}

25\. “How does the path come from a concentrated mind and isn’t obtained by a distracted mind? A monk is secluded from desires and secluded from bad and unskillful things … they accomplish and dwell in the fourth meditation. This is how the path comes from a concentrated mind and isn’t obtained by a distracted mind.
{: #p25}

26\. “How does the path come from wisdom and isn’t obtained from foolishness? A monk cultivates wisdom. He contemplates the law of arising and decay and attains the noble wisdom and insight that accords with this knowledge. He discerns and comprehends it in order to correctly end suffering. This is how the path comes from wisdom and isn’t obtained from foolishness.
{: #p26}

27\. “How does the path come from non-frivolity, enjoying non-frivolity, and practicing non-frivolity and isn’t obtained by frivolity, enjoying frivolity, or practicing frivolity? A monk’s mind always ceases frivolity and happily dwells in nirvāṇa without remainder. His mind forever lives happily, rejoices, and is mentally freed. This is how the path comes from non-frivolity, enjoying non-frivolity, and practicing non-frivolity and isn’t obtained by frivolity, enjoying frivolity, or practicing frivolity.
{: #p27}

#### Aniruddha

28\. “Monks, the monk Aniruddha had accomplished these eight thoughts of a great man. Afterward, he spent a summer retreat in Cedi at Waterside Grove. With this teaching of mine, he lived alone in seclusion, his mind wasn’t careless, and he cultivated diligence. After living there alone in seclusion, not being careless, and cultivating diligence, he made himself a son of the clan. He shaved off his hair and beard, put on the reddish-brown robes, became a believer, and left home to train on the path in homelessness.
{: #p28}

29\. “Only when the unsurpassed religious practice is finished will he accomplish and dwell in their own knowledge, awakening, and direct experience. He’ll truly know: ‘Birth has been ended, the religious practice has been established, the task has been accomplished, and I will not again be subject to existence.’”
{: #p29}

30\. At that moment, Venerable Aniruddha became an arhat. His mind rightly liberated, he became an elder and honored one. It was then that he spoke these verses,
{: #p30}

* {:.verse #v1} “Knowing my thoughts of reflection from afar,  
The unsurpassed world’s teacher  
With right body and mind entered <em>samādhi</em>  
And came here instantly by levitation.

* {:.verse #v2} What had been thought in my mind  
He stated and added another to it:  
The buddhas’ enjoyment of non-frivolity  
And seclusion from all frivolity.

* {:.verse #v3} Once I knew the Dharma that came from him,  
I happily lived in the right Dharma,  
Achieved penetration of <em>samādhi</em>,  
And accomplished the task of the Buddha’s Dharma.

* {:.verse #v4} I was not delighted by death  
Nor did I wish to be born;  
When I followed it, I was capable of advancing,  
Established in right mindfulness and right knowledge.

* {:.verse #v5} At [Vyālī] Bamboo Grove,  
My life will reach its end there.  
It’ll be under the bamboo trees,  
That parinirvāṇa without remainder.”

31\. The Buddha thus spoke. Venerable Aniruddha and the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p31}

---

### Notes
1. {: #n1} For the source text, cf. <a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T01n0026_p0540c18" target="_blank">T26.1.540c18-2b1</a>. The direct parallel with this <em>sūtra</em> is [AN 8.30](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30){: target="_blank"}. [\[Back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 15 October 2024
{: .revised}

---
