---
layout: default
title: 'The Medium Discourses | Chapter 5: Related to Training | 48. Precepts (2)'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: MA_047.html
next: MA_049.html
---

# [The Medium Discourses](index.html)
## Chapter 5: Related to Training
### 48. Precepts (2)

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){: #ref1} One time, the Buddha traveled to the country of Śrāvastī and stayed at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that Venerable Śāriputra addressed the monks, “Good men, if a monk violates the precepts, that’s detrimental to having no regrets … gladness … joy … calmness … happiness … samādhi … true seeing and true knowing … disenchantment … lack of desire … liberation. If he doesn’t have liberation, that’s detrimental to nirvāṇa.
{: #p2}

3\. “Good men, it’s like a tree that has damaged. It’s branches … trunk … core … joints … limbs … leaves … flowers … fruit then don’t form completely.
{: #p3}

4\. “Good men, you should know that a monk is likewise. If he violates the precepts, that’s detrimental to having no regrets … gladness … joy … calmness … happiness … samādhi … true seeing and true knowing … disenchantment … lack of desire … liberation. If he doesn’t have liberation, that’s detrimental to nirvāṇa.
{: #p4}

5\. “Good men, if a monk observes the precepts, he readily cultivates having no regrets … gladness … joy … calmness … happiness … samādhi … true seeing and true knowing … disenchantment … lack of desire … liberation. If he has liberation, he readily cultivates nirvāṇa.
{: #p5}

6\. “Good men, it’s like a tree that doesn’t have damaged roots. It’s branches … trunk … core … joints … limbs … leaves … flowers … fruit then will form completely.
{: #p6}

7\. “Good men, you should know that a monk is likewise. If a monk observes the precepts, he readily cultivates having no regrets … gladness … joy … calmness … happiness … samādhi … true seeing and true knowing … disenchantment … lack of desire … liberation. If he has liberation, he readily cultivates nirvāṇa.”
{: #p7}

8\. Venerable Śāriputra spoke thus. Those monks who heard what Venerable Śāriputra taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p8}

---

### Notes

1. {: #n1} For the source text, cf. <a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T01n0026_p0486c03" target="_blank">T26.1.486c3-19</a>. This <em>sūtra</em> is a concise version of [AN 11.4](https://suttacentral.net/an11.4){: target="_blank"}. [\[Back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 28 March 2024
{: .revised}

---
