---
layout: default
title: 'The Medium Discourses | Chapter 5: Related to Training | 45. Conscience and Modesty'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: MA_044.html
next: MA_046.html
---

# [The Medium Discourses](index.html)
## Chapter 5: Related to Training
### 45. Conscience and Modesty

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){: #ref1} One time, the Buddha traveled to the country of Śrāvastī and stayed at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “If a monk doesn’t have conscience or modesty, then that’s detrimental to affection and respect. If he doesn’t have affection or respect, then that’s detrimental to faith. If he doesn’t have faith, then that’s detrimental to right thinking. If he doesn’t have right thinking, then that’s detrimental to right mindfulness and right knowledge. If he doesn’t have right mindfulness and right knowledge, then that’s detrimental to guarding his faculties … guarding the precepts … having no regrets … gladness … joy … calmness … happiness … samādhi … true seeing and true knowing … disenchantment … lack of desire … liberation. If he doesn’t have liberation, then that’s detrimental to nirvāṇa.
{: #p2}

3\. “If a monk has conscience and modesty, he readily cultivates affection and respect. If he has affection and respect, he readily cultivates faith. If he has faith, he readily cultivates right thinking. If he has right thinking, he readily cultivates right mindfulness and right knowledge. If he has right mindfulness and right knowledge, he readily cultivates guarding his faculties … guarding the precepts … having no regrets … gladness … joy … calmness … happiness … samādhi … true seeing and true knowing … disenchantment … lack of desire … liberation. If he has liberation, he readily cultivates nirvāṇa.”
{: #p3}

4\. This is what the Buddha said. Those monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p4}

---

### Notes

1. {: #n1} For the source text, cf. <a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T01n0026_p0486a05" target="_blank">T26.1.486a5-19</a>. This <em>sūtra</em> is parallel with [AN 7.65](https://suttacentral.net/an7.65){: target="_blank"} and [AN 11.3](https://suttacentral.net/an11.3){: target="_blank"}. It’s similar to AN 7.65 because its point of departure is conscience and modesty, but it uses the larger list like AN 11.1-5 but lacks the tree metaphors. [\[Back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 28 March 2024
{: .revised}

---
