---
layout: default
title: 'The Medium Discourses | Chapter 7: King Dīrghāyu | 76. [Ugracelā]'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: MA_075.html
next: MA_077.html
---

# [The Medium Discourses](index.html)
## Chapter 7: King Dīrghāyu
### 76. [Ugracelā]

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){: #ref1} One time, the Buddha traveled to [Ugracelā] and stayed on the shore of Gaṅgā Lake.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that a monk rose from sitting in reflection in the afternoon and went to the Buddha. He bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet, withdrew to sit to one side. He said, “Bhagavān, please teach me the essentials of the Dharma. After hearing the teaching from the Bhagavān, I’ll live alone in seclusion, my mind won’t be careless, and I’ll cultivate diligence. As a result of living alone in seclusion, not being careless, and cultivating diligence, I’ll become a clansman who shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the reddish-brown robes, becomes a believer, and leaves home to train on the path in homelessness. When the unsurpassed religious practice is finished, then I’ll accomplish and dwell in my own knowledge, perception, and realization: ‘Birth has been ended, the religious practice has been established, the task has been accomplished. I truly know that I’m no longer subject to existence.’”
{: #p2}

3\. The Bhagavān told him, “Monk, you should thus train: ‘Let my mind abide in an inner and unperturbed cultivation of measureless goodness.’ Again, contemplate the inner body as body, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p3}

4\. “Again, contemplate the outer body as body, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p4}

5\. “Again, contemplate the inner and outer body as body, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p5}

6\. “Monk, as you come and go according to these <em>samādhi</em>s, cultivate goodness. While you’re standing, sitting, lying down, asleep, awake, and waking up, you should also cultivate it.
{: #p6}

7\. “Furthermore, you should cultivate <em>samādhi</em> with perception and examination, <em>samādhi</em> with no perception and some examination, and <em>samādhi</em> without perception or examination. You should also cultivate <em>samādhi</em> together with joy, <em>samādhi</em> together with happiness, <em>samādhi</em> together with <em>samādhi</em>, and <em>samādhi</em> together with equanimity.
{: #p7}

8\. “Monk, suppose you cultivate these <em>samādhi</em>s and the utmost goodness. Monk, you should again contemplate inner feelings as feelings, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p8}

9\. “Again, contemplate outer feelings as feelings, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p9}

10\. “Again, contemplate inner and outer feelings as feelings, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p10}

11\. “Monk, as you come and go according to these <em>samādhi</em>s, cultivate goodness. While you’re standing, sitting, lying down, asleep, awake, and waking up, you should also cultivate it.
{: #p11}

12\. “Furthermore, you should cultivate <em>samādhi</em> with perception and examination, <em>samādhi</em> with no perception and some examination, and <em>samādhi</em> without perception or examination. You should also cultivate <em>samādhi</em> together with joy, <em>samādhi</em> together with happiness, <em>samādhi</em> together with <em>samādhi</em>, and <em>samādhi</em> together with equanimity.
{: #p12}

13\. “Monk, suppose you cultivate these <em>samādhi</em>s and the utmost goodness. Monk, you should again contemplate the inner mind as mind, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p13}

14\. “Again, contemplate the outer mind as mind, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p14}

15\. “Again, contemplate the inner and outer mind as mind, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p15}

16\. “Monk, as you come and go according to these <em>samādhi</em>s, cultivate goodness. While you’re standing, sitting, lying down, asleep, awake, and waking up, you should also cultivate it.
{: #p16}

17\. “Furthermore, you should cultivate <em>samādhi</em> with perception and examination, <em>samādhi</em> with no perception and some examination, and <em>samādhi</em> without perception or examination. You should also cultivate <em>samādhi</em> together with joy, <em>samādhi</em> together with happiness, <em>samādhi</em> together with <em>samādhi</em>, and <em>samādhi</em> together with equanimity.
{: #p17}

18\. “Monk, suppose you cultivate these <em>samādhi</em>s and the utmost goodness. Monk, you should again contemplate inner principles as principles, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p18}

19\. “Again, contemplate outer principles as principles, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p19}

20\. “Again, contemplate inner and outer principles as principles, applying the utmost diligence. Establishing right mindfulness and right knowledge, well steer your own mind; make it free of greed and without grief.
{: #p20}

21\. “Monk, as you come and go according to these <em>samādhi</em>s, cultivate goodness. While you’re standing, sitting, lying down, asleep, awake, and waking up, you should also cultivate it.
{: #p21}

22\. “Furthermore, you should cultivate <em>samādhi</em> with perception and examination, <em>samādhi</em> with no perception and some examination, and <em>samādhi</em> without perception or examination. You should also cultivate <em>samādhi</em> together with joy, <em>samādhi</em> together with happiness, <em>samādhi</em> together with <em>samādhi</em>, and <em>samādhi</em> together with equanimity.
{: #p22}

23\. “Monk, suppose someone cultivates these <em>samādhi</em>s of utmost goodness. Monk, they accomplish and dwell in one direction pervaded with mind and kindness. They do this in two, three, and four directions, the four intercardinals, up, and down, pervading everywhere with their mind and kindness. Having no bonds, enmity, anger, or quarrel, they accomplish and dwell in pervading the whole world, [their mind being] broad and vast, measureless, and well cultivated.
{: #p23}

24\. “So it is with compassion, joy, and equanimity. Having no bonds, enmity, anger, or quarrel, they accomplish and dwell in pervading the whole world, [their mind being] broad and vast, measureless, and well cultivated.
{: #p24}

25\. “Monk, suppose you cultivate these <em>samādhi</em>s of utmost goodness. If you travel east, you’ll surely attain well-being and not have any distress. If you travel south, west, or north, you’ll surely attain well-being and not have any distress. Monk, if you cultivate these <em>samādhi</em>s and the utmost goodness, then even if I did not say you abide in good qualities, how could I say they would decline? Day and night, those good qualities will only grow and not decline.
{: #p25}

26\. “Monk, if you cultivate these <em>samādhi</em>s of utmost goodness, you’ll surely attain one of two fruits. You might attain ultimate knowledge in the present life, or you might instead become a non-returner with some remainder.”
{: #p26}

27\. Hearing what the Buddha taught, that monk well accepted and well retained it. He then rose from his seat, bowed his head at the Buddha’s feet, circled him three times, and left. Having accepted and retained the Buddha’s instructions, he went to live alone in seclusion, his mind wasn’t careless, and he cultivated diligence. As a result of living alone in seclusion, not being careless, and cultivating diligence, he became a clansman. He shaved off his hair and beard, put on the reddish-brown robes, became a believer, and left home to train on the path in homelessness.
{: #p27}

28\. It was only when the unsurpassed religious practice was finished that he accomplished and dwelt in his own knowledge, awakening, and direct experience. He truly knew: “Birth has been ended, the religious practice has been established, the task has been accomplished, and I will not again be subject to existence.” After knowing the Dharma, that venerable became an <em>arhat</em>.
{: #p28}

29\. This is what the Buddha said. Those monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p29}

---

### Notes
1. {: #n1} For the source text, cf. <a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T01n0026_p0543c01" target="_blank">T26.1.543c1-4b19</a>. Direct parallels for this <em>sūtra</em> include [AN 8.63](https://suttacentral.net/an8.63){: target="_blank"} and [SN 47.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.3){: target="_blank"}. [\[Back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 15 October 2024
{: .revised}

---
