---
layout: default
title: 'The Medium Discourses | Chapter 5: Related to Cultivation | 51. The Origin'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: MA_050.html
next: MA_055.html
---

# [The Medium Discourses](index.html)
## Chapter 5: Related to Cultivation
### 51. The Origin

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){: #ref1} One time, the Buddha traveled to the country of Śrāvastī and stayed at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “The origins of the craving for existence isn’t knowable. In the past, there was no craving for existence, but now the craving for existence has arisen, and it’s readily knowable what the cause of the craving for existence is.
{: #p2}

3\. “The craving for existence has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of the craving for existence?”
{: #p3}

They answered, “Ignorance is its cultivation.”

4\. “Ignorance also has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of ignorance?”
{: #p4}

They answered, “The five hindrances are its cultivation.”

5\. “The five hindrances also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of the five hindrances?”
{: #p5}

They answered, “The three bad conducts are their cultivation.”

6\. “The three bad conducts also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of the three bad conducts?”
{: #p6}

They answered, “Unguarded faculties are their cultivation.”

7\. “Unguarded faculties have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of unguarded faculties?”
{: #p7}

They answered, “Incorrect mindfulness and incorrect knowledge are their cultivation.”

8\. “Incorrect mindfulness and incorrect knowledge have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of incorrect mindfulness and incorrect knowledge?”
{: #p8}

They answered, “Incorrect thinking is their cultivation.”

9\. “Incorrect thinking has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of incorrect thinking?”
{: #p9}

They answered, “Disbelief is its cultivation.”

10\. “Disbelief has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of disbelief?”
{: #p10}

They answered, “Hearing bad teachings is its cultivation.”

11\. “Hearing bad teachings has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of hearing bad teachings?”
{: #p11}

They answered, “Associating with bad friends is its cultivation.”

12\. “Associating with bad friends has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of associating with bad friends?

They answered, “Bad people are its cultivation.”
{: #p12}

13\. “Being with bad people, one readily associates with bad friends. Having associated with bad friends, one readily hears bad teachings. Having heard bad teachings, one readily has disbelief. Disbelief having arisen, one readily has incorrect thinking. Having incorrect thinking, one readily has incorrect mindfulness and incorrect knowledge. Having incorrect mindfulness and incorrect knowledge, one readily has unguarded faculties. Having unguarded faculties, one readily has the three bad conducts. Having the three bad conducts, one readily has the five hindrances. Having the five hindrances, one readily has ignorance. Having ignorance, one readily has the craving for existence. In this way, the craving for existence develops and becomes fully formed.
{: #p13}

14\. “Insight and liberation also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of insight and liberation?”
{: #p14}

They answered, “The seven factors of awakening are their cultivation.”

15\. “The seven factors of awakening also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of the seven factors of awakening?”
{: #p15}

They answered, “The four abodes of mindfulness are their cultivation.”

16\. “The four abodes of mindfulness also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of the four abodes of mindfulness?”
{: #p16}

They answered, “The three wonderful conducts are their cultivation.”

17\. “The three wonderful conducts also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of the three wonderful conducts?”
{: #p17}

They answered, “Guarded faculties are their cultivation.”

18\. “Guarded faculties also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of guarded faculties?”
{: #p18}

They answered, “Right mindfulness and right knowledge are their cultivation.”

19\. “Right mindfulness and right knowledge also have their cultivation; they’re not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of right mindfulness and right knowledge?”
{: #p19}

They answered, “Right thinking is their cultivation.”

20\. “Right thinking also has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of right thinking?”
{: #p20}

They answered, “Faith is its cultivation.”

21\. “Faith has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of faith?”
{: #p21}

They answered, “Hearing the good teaching is its cultivation.”

22\. “Hearing the good teaching also has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of hearing the good teaching?”
{: #p22}

They answered, “Associating with good friends is its cultivation.”

23\. “Associating with good friends also has its cultivation; it’s not without cultivation. What’s called the cultivation of associating with good friends?”
{: #p23}

They answered, “Good people are its cultivation.”

24\. “Being with good people, one readily associates with good friends. Having associated with good friends, one readily hears the good teaching. Having heard the good teaching, one readily has faith. Faith having arisen, one readily has right thinking. Having right thinking, one readily has right mindfulness and right knowledge. Having right mindfulness and right knowledge, one readily has guarded faculties. Having guarded faculties, one readily has the three marvelous conducts. Having the three marvelous conducts, one readily has the four abodes of mindfulness. Having the four abodes of mindfulness, one readily has the seven factors of awakening. Having the seven factors of awakening, one readily has insight and liberation. In this way, insight and liberation develops and becomes fully formed.”
{: #p24}

25\. The Buddha spoke thus. Those monks who had heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p25}

---

### Notes

1. {: #n1} The closest Pali parallel to this sūtra is [AN 10.62](https://suttacentral.net/an10.62){: target="_blank"}, but it lacks the metaphor of rain. [\[Back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 28 March 2024
{: .revised}

---
