---
layout: default
title: 'The Medium Discourses | Chapter 1: Sevens | 4. The Water Parable'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: MA_003.html
next: MA_005.html
---
# [The Medium Discourses](../../index.html)
## [Chapter 1: Sevens](index.html)
### 4. The Water Parable

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha traveled to the country of Śrāvastī and stayed at Anāthapiṇḍada Park in Jeta Grove.
{: #p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “I will explain the seven people in water for you. Listen closely, listen closely! Well consider it.”
{: #p2}

The monks then accepted the teaching and listened.

3\. The Buddha said, “What are the seven? Sometimes a person lies prostrate in the water.[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2} Sometimes a person emerges from the water but goes back under. Sometimes a person emerges from the water and stands up. Sometimes a person emerges from the water, stands up, and looks around after standing up. Sometimes a person emerges from the water, stands up, looks around after standing up, and wades across after looking around. Sometimes a person emerges from the water, stands up, looks around after standing up, wades across after looking around, and reaches the other shore after wading across. Sometimes a person emerges from the water, stands up, looks around after standing up, wades across after looking around, reaches the other shore after wading across, and is called a person who stands on shore after reaching the other shore.
{: #p3}

4\. “Thus, I will again explain the people of these seven water metaphors. Listen closely, listen closely! Well consider it.”
The monks then accepted the teaching and listened.
{: #p4}

5\. The Buddha said, “What are the seven? Sometimes a person lies prostrate. Another person goes back under after emerging. Another person stands up after emerging. Another person stands up after emerging, and they look around after standing up. Another person stands up after emerging, they look around after standing up, and they wade across [424b] after looking around. Another person stands up after emerging, they look around after standing up, they wade across after looking around, and they reach the other side after wading across. Another person stands up after emerging, they look around after standing up, they wade across after looking around, they reach the other side after wading across, and they’re called a priest standing on shore after reaching the other shore.
{: #p5}

6\. “These are the people of the seven water metaphors, which I have explained briefly. Do you know what it means as it’s been described and as it’s been defined? How is it to be discerned? What causes and conditions are there?”
{: #p6}

7\. The monks then said to the Bhagavān, “The Bhagavān is the basis of the Dharma! The Bhagavān is the Dharma lord! The Dharma comes from the Bhagavān! Please let him teach it. After listening, we’ll get a detailed knowledge of its meaning.”
{: #p7}

8\. The Buddha then addressed them, “All of you, listen closely, and well consider it. I will discern its meaning for you.”
{: #p8}

The monks then accepted the teaching and listened.


#### 1\. The Person Who Lies Prostrate

9\. The Buddha said, “How does a person lie prostrate? It means a person is covered up by unwholesome things. They are stained by defilements, which bring the results of bad things and create the basis of birth-and-death.
{: #p9}

10\. “This is called the person who lies prostrate. He’s like a person who’s submerged and lies prostrate in water. I say this person is likewise. This is called the person of the first water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p10}

#### 2\. The Person Who Goes Back Under

11\. “How does a person go back under after emerging? It means a person has emerged and attained faith in the good Dharma. Observing precepts, generous, well-versed, and wise, they cultivate the good Dharma. At some point later, they lose their faith; it wasn’t resolute. They lose their observance of precepts, generosity, learning, and wisdom; they weren’t resolute.
{: #p11}

12\. “This is called the person who goes back under after emerging. They’re like a person who’s submerged in water and goes back under after emerging. I say this person is likewise. This is called the person of the second water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p12}

#### 3\. The Person Who Stands Up

13\. “How does a person stand up after emerging? It means a person emerges and then attains faith in the good Dharma. Observing precepts, generous, well-versed, and wise, they cultivate the good Dharma. At some point later, their faith remains resolute; it isn’t lost. Their observance of precepts, generosity, learning, and wisdom are resolute; they aren’t lost.
{: #p13}

14\. “This is called the person who stands up after emerging. They’re like the person who’s submerged in water and stands up after emerging. I say this person is likewise. This is called the person of the third water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p14}

#### 4\. The Person Who Looks Around

15\. “How does a person stand up after emerging and look around after standing? It means a person emerges and then attains faith in the good Dharma. Observing precepts, generous, well-versed, and wise, they cultivate the good Dharma. At some point later, their faith remains resolute; it isn’t lost. Their observance of precepts, generosity, learning, and wisdom are resolute; they aren’t lost.
{: #p15}

16\. “Abiding in the good Dharma, they know suffering as it truly is. They know suffering’s cultivation, knows suffering’s cessation, and know the path to the cessation of suffering as they truly are. Thus knowing and thus seeing, they readily end the three bonds, which are belief in the individual, adherence to precepts, and doubt. Once these three bonds have ended, they become a stream entrant and don’t fall into bad states. They’re certainly destined for right awakening [424c] and will experience at most seven existences. After seven rebirths up in the heavens or here among humans, they will readily reach the limit of suffering.
{: #p16}

17\. “This is called the person who stands up after emerging and looks around after standing. They’re like a person submerged in water who stands up after emerging and looks around after standing up. I say that person is likewise. This is called the person of the fourth water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p17}

#### 5\. The Person Who Wades Across

18\. “How does a person stand up after emerging, look around after standing, and wade across after looking around? It means a person emerges and attains faith in the good Dharma. Observing precepts, generous, well-versed, and wise, they cultivate the good Dharma. At some point later, their faith remains resolute; it isn’t lost. Their observance of precepts, generosity, learning, and wisdom are resolute; they aren’t lost.
{: #p18}

19\. “Abiding in the good Dharma, they know suffering as it truly is. They know suffering’s cultivation, know suffering’s cessation, and know the path to the cessation of suffering as they truly are. Thus knowing and thus seeing, they readily end the three bonds, which are belief in the individual, adherence to precepts, and doubt. Once these three bonds are ended, lust, hate, and delusion are weakened. They attain one rebirth up in the heavens or here among humans. After one rebirth, they’ll readily reach the limit of suffering.
{: #p19}

20\. “This is called the person who stands up after emerging, looks around after standing, and wades across after looking around. They’re like a person submerged in water who stands up after emerging, looks around after standing, and wades across after looking around. I say this person is likewise. This is called the person of the fifth water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p20}

#### 6\. The Person Who Reaches Shore

21\. “How does a person stand up after emerging, look around after standing, wade across after looking around, and reach the other shore after wading across? It means a person emerges and then attains faith in the good Dharma. Observing precepts, generous, well-versed, and wise, they cultivate the good Dharma. At some point later, their faith remains resolute; it isn’t lost. Their observance of precepts, generosity, learning, and wisdom are resolute; they aren’t lost.
{: #p21}

22\. “Abiding in the good Dharma, they know suffering as it truly is. They know suffering’s cultivation, know suffering’s cessation, and know the path to the cessation of suffering as they truly are. Thus knowing and thus seeing, they readily end the five lower bonds, which are desire, anger, belief in the individual, adherence to precepts, and doubt. Once these five lower bonds have ended, they’re born elsewhere and readily attain parinirvāṇa. They attain irreversibility and don’t return to this world.
{: #p22}

23\. “This is called the person who stands up after emerging, looks around after standing, wades across after looking around, and reaches the other shore after wading across. They are like a person submerged in water who stands up after emerging, looks around after standing, wades across after looking around, and reaches the other shore after wading across. I say this person is likewise. This is the person of the sixth water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p23}

#### 7\. The Person Who’s Called a Priest on the Other Shore

24\. “How does a person stand up after emerging, look around after standing, wade across after looking around, reach the other shore after wading across, and is called a priest standing on shore after reaching the other shore? It means a person emerges and attains faith in the good Dharma. Observing precepts, generous, well-versed, and wise, they cultivate the good Dharma. [425a] At some point later, their faith remains resolute; it isn’t lost. Their observance of precepts, generosity, learning, and wisdom are resolute; they aren’t lost.
{: #p24}

25\. “Abiding in the good Dharma, they know suffering as it really is. They know suffering’s cultivation, know suffering’s cessation, and know the path to the cessation of suffering as they really are. Thus knowing and thus seeing, their mind is liberated from the contaminants of desire, and it’s liberated from the contaminants of existence and ignorance. After being liberated, they readily know that they are liberated: ‘Birth has been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished.’ They are no longer subject to existence and know it as it really is.
{: #p25}

26\. “This is called the person who stands up after emerging, looks around after standing, wades across after looking around, reaches the other shore after wading across, and is called a priest standing on shore after reaching the other shore. They’re like a person submerged in water who stands up after emerging, looks around after standing, wades across after looking around, reaches the other shore after wading across, and is called someone who stands on shore after reaching the other shore. I say this person is likewise. This is called the person of the seventh water metaphor. The world in truth does have such people.
{: #p26}

27\. “I had said, ‘I will explain the seven people in water for you,’ and for this reason I have explained it.”
{: #p27}

28\. The Buddha spoke thus. Those monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{: #p28}

### Notes

1. {:#n1} Parallels include [AN 7.15](https://suttacentral.net/an7.15){: target="_blank"}, [EA 39.3](https://suttacentral.net/ea39.3){: target="_blank"}, and [T29](https://suttacentral.net/T29){: target="_blank"}. [\[Back\]](#ref1)
2. {:#n2} *lies prostrate*. Lit. "constantly lies." [\[Back\]](#ref2)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 14 September 2020
{: .revised}

---
