---
layout: default
title: 'The Numerical Discourses | Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished | 2. Nirvāṇa'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: EA_16_01.html
next: EA_16_03.html
---

<h1><a href='../index.html'>The Numerical Discourses</a></h1>
<h2>Chapter 16: The Fire Extinguished</h2>

<table class="trans">
  <th class='ch'>（二） 涅槃</th>
  <th class='en'>2. Nirvāṇa</th>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t125.2.579a12'>聞如是： 一時，佛在舍衛國、祇樹、給孤獨園。</td>
    <td id='p1'>1. Thus I have heard:<sup id="ref1"><a href="#n1">1</a></sup> One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t125.2.579a13'>爾時，世尊告諸比丘： 「有此二法涅槃界。 云何為二？ 有餘涅槃界、無餘涅槃界。 彼云何名為有餘涅槃界？ 於是，比丘滅五下分結，即彼般涅槃不還來此世。 是謂名為有餘涅槃界。</td>
    <td id='p2'>2. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “There are two realms of <em>nirvāṇa</em>.<sup id="ref2"><a href="#n2">2</a></sup> What are the two? The <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm with remainder and the <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm without remainder. What’s called the <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm with remainder? Here, a monk destroys the five lower bonds, and then he <em>parinirvāṇa</em>s [after] not returning to this world. This is said to be the <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm with remainder.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t125.2.579a17'>「彼云何名為無餘涅槃界？ 於是，比丘盡有漏，成無漏。 意解脫、智慧解脫。 自身作證而自遊戲： 『生死已盡，梵行已立。 更不受有，如實知之。』 是謂為無餘涅槃界。 此二涅槃界。</td>
    <td id='p3'>3. “What’s the <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm without remainder? Here, a monk ends the contaminants of existence and becomes uncontaminated. He’s liberated in mind and liberated in wisdom. He realizes and explores it for himself. He truly knows this: ‘Birth and death have been ended, the religious life has been established, the task has been accomplished, and I won’t be subject to another existence.’ This is said to be the <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm without remainder. These are the two <em>nirvāṇa</em> realms.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t125.2.579a21'>「當求，方便至無餘涅槃界。 如是，諸比丘，當作是學。」</td>
    <td id='p4'>4. “Therefore, monks, you should seek the methods that reach the <em>nirvāṇa</em> realm without remainder. Thus, monks, you should train yourselves.”</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class='ch' title='t125.2.579a22'>爾時，諸比丘聞佛所說歡喜，奉行。</td>
    <td id='p5'>5. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<hr/>

<h3 id="notes">Notes</h3>

<ol class="notes-list">
<li id="n1"><p>This <em>sūtra</em> is parallel with <a href="https://suttacentral.net/iti44" target="_blank">Iti 44</a> in Pali sources. It also has a parallel in Xuanzang’s translation of another <em>Itivṛttaka</em> collection (cf. <a href="https://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/zh/T17n0765_p0678c09" target="_blank">T765.17.678c9</a>).</p>
<p>We should note that Iti 44 defines <em>nirvāṇa</em> with remainder as an <em>arhat</em> who is still in this world, while the this <em>sūtra</em> defines it as attaining <em>parinirvāṇa</em> somewhere else (i.e., the fruit of non-returning). The parallel translated by Xuanzang agrees that the two are realization of <em>nirvāṇa</em> in this life or the fruit of the non-returner. [<a href="#ref1">back</a>]</p></li>
<li id="n2"><p>nirvāṇa <em>realms</em>. C. 涅槃界, G. <em>nivana dhadu</em>, P. <em>nibbāna dhātu</em>, S. <em>nirvāṇa dhātu</em>. Most translators translate S. <em>dhātu</em> (C. 界) in this term as “element” to avoid the implication of S. <em>nirvāṇa</em> being a place like a heaven. Positing a <em>nirvāṇa</em> element is equally problematic to me, though, and the <em>Ekottarika</em> does speak of it as a figurative destination that’s reached (cf. T125.2.607a28, 608b27, 714b4, 728b15, etc.), so I’ve translated S. <em>dhātu</em> as “realm.” This is, in fact, the literal meaning of 界. [<a href="#ref2">back</a>]</p></li>
</ol>
<hr/>

<p class="translator">Translator: Charles Patton</p>
<p class='revised'>Last Revised: 9 November 2024</p>

<hr/>