---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 148. Sixteen Monks'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA1_147.html
next: ../SA_02/index.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 148. Sixteen Monks

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha stayed in Mathurā on the bank of the [Vati] River at the Umbrella Mango Tree Park.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “Stand on your own island. Stand on your own support. Stand on the island of the teaching. Stand on the support of the teaching. Don’t do so on another island or another support.
{:#p2}

3\. “Monks, you should correctly contemplate: ‘I’ll stand on my own island, stand on my own support, stand on the island of the teaching, and stand on the support of the teaching. I won’t do so on another island or another support.’ As a result of what does grief, sorrow, vexation, and suffering arise? How do they exist? What causes them? What ties them together? How do you yourself contemplate the arising of grief, sorrow, vexation, and suffering that have yet to arise and the growth of grief, sorrow, vexation, and suffering that have already arisen?”
{:#p3}

4\. The monks said to the Buddha, “The Bhagavān is the Dharma root, the Dharma eye, and the Dharma support. Please, let him explain this. After listening, the monks will hand it down as it was said.”
{:#p4}

5\. The Buddha told the monks, “Listen closely, and well consider it. I will explain it for you. Monks, when contemplating the arising of grief, sorrow, vexation, and suffering that are yet to arise and the growth of grief, sorrow, vexation, and suffering that have arisen, they have form, form that causes, and form that ties them together. Feelings, perceptions, volitions, and consciousness are likewise. Monks, could it be that form is permanent, eternal, unchanging, and a correct abode?”
{:#p5}

They replied, “No, Bhagavān.”

6\. The Buddha told the monks, “Good, monks! Good! Forms are impermanent. Suppose good sons know that forms are impermanent, painful, and changing. Parting from desire for them, they cease, become tranquil, and disappear. After knowing that since the distant past all forms have been things that are impermanent, painful, and changing, then when forms are the causes and conditions that give rise to grief, sorrow, vexation, and suffering, those good sons will stop them. Having stopped them, they’ll have no attachments. Because they have no attachments, they’ll live in well-being and happiness. Living in well-being and happiness is called nirvāṇa. Feelings, perceptions, volitions, and consciousness are likewise.”
{:#p6}

7\. When the Buddha spoke this sūtra, 16 monks didn’t produce the contaminants, and their minds were liberated.
{:#p7}

8\. After the Buddha had spoken this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p8}

###### Summary Verse

* {:.verse} Bamboo grove, Vaiśālī,\\
Purity, correct contemplation,\\
Impermanent, painful, not self,\\
Five, three, and 16 [monks].

### Notes
 {:#n1} This sutra is parallel with [SN 22.43](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.43){:target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 14 September 2020
{: .revised}

---