---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 146. The Aggregates Are Empty (2)'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA1_145.html
next: SA1_146.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 146. The Aggregates Are Not Self (2)

1\. Thus I have heard:  One time, the Buddha was staying at Ṛṣipatana in the Deer Preserve of Bārāṇasī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed five monks who remained, “Form doesn’t have self. If form had self, it wouldn’t be that illness and pain arise from form, and there wouldn’t be the desires: ‘Let form be thus; let it not be thus.’ It’s because form is without self that there’s illness and pain that arise from form, and these desires are possible: ‘Let form be thus; let it not be thus.’ *Feeling, perception, volition, and consciousness are likewise.*
{:#p2}

3\. “Monks, what do you think? Is form permanent, or is it impermanent?”
{:#p3}

The monks said to the Buddha, “Impermanent, Bhagavān.”

4\. “Monks, if something is impermanent, is it painful?”
{:#p4}

The monks said to the Buddha, “It’s painful, Bhagavān.”

5\. “If it’s impermanent and painful, it’s something that changes. Would the well-versed noble disciple see self, something other than self, or both in it?”
{:#p5}

The monks said to the Buddha, “No, Bhagavān.”

6\. “*Feeling, perception, volition, and consciousness are likewise.* Therefore, monks, forms that exist, whether past, future, or present, whether internal or external, crude or fine, lovely or ugly, far or near, they are all not self and don’t belong to self when contemplated as they really are. *Feeling, perception, volition, and consciousness are likewise.*
{:#p6}

7\. “Monks, the well-versed noble disciple sees that what’s in these five acquired aggregates is not self and doesn’t belong to self. Contemplating them thus, they cling to nothing in all the world. Because they cling to nothing, they grasp nothing in the world at all. Because they grasp nothing, they attach to nothing. Because they attach to nothing, they self-awaken to nirvāṇa: ‘My births have been ended, the religious practice has been established, and the task has been accomplished. I myself know that I won’t be subject to a later existence.’”
{:#p7}

8\. After the Buddha spoke this sutra, the contaminants didn’t arise in those five monks who remained, and their minds were liberated.
{:#p8}

9\. After the Buddha spoke this sutra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and handed it down.
{:#p9}

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This sutra is the famous second sermon that the Buddha taught to his first five disciples. It’s parallel with [SN 22.59](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.59){:target="_blank"} and [T102](../alternates/T102.html). [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 28 August 2020
{: .revised}

---