---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 149. Myself'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA1_148.html
next: ../SA_02/index.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 149. Myself

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “I have no quarrel with the world, but the world has a quarrel with me. Why is that? Monks, if someone speaks according to the teaching, they don’t have a quarrel with the world. The world’s sages say, ‘It exists,’ and I also say, ‘It exists.’ How is it that the world’s sages say, ‘It exists,’ and I also say, ‘It exists’?
{:#p2}

3\. “Monks, form is impermanent, painful, and something that changes. The world’s sages say, ‘It exists,’ and I also say, ‘It exists.’ Thus, feeling … perception … volition … consciousness is impermanent, painful, and something that changes. The world’s sages say, ‘It exists,’ and I also say, ‘It exists.’
{:#p3}

4\. “The world’s sages say, ‘It doesn’t exist,’ and I also say, ‘It doesn’t exist.’ That is, ‘Form is permanent, eternal, unchanging, and a correct abode.’ The world’s sages say, ‘That doesn’t exist,’ and I say, ‘That doesn’t exist.’ ‘Feeling … perceptions … volitions … consciousness is permanent, eternal, unchanging, and a correct abode.’ The world’s sages say, ‘It doesn’t exist,’ and I say, ‘It doesn’t exist.’ This is called the worldly sages saying, ‘It doesn’t exist,’ and I also saying, ‘It doesn’t exist.’
{:#p4}

5\. “Monks, there is a mundane rule of the world that I myself also know and realize, and I discern, explain, and demonstrate it for people. The world is blind, without eyes, not knowing, and not seeing it, but it’s not I who is at fault.
{:#p5}

6\. “Monks, what is the mundane rule of the world that I myself know and realize and that I explain, discern, and demonstrate for people who are blind, without eyes, don’t know, and don’t see it? Here, monks, form is impermanent, painful, and something that changes. This is called the mundane law of the world. Thus, feeling … perception … volition … consciousness is impermanent, painful, and something that changes. This is the mundane rule of the world. Monks, this is the mundane rule of the world that I myself know and realize and that I discern, explain, and demonstrate for people who are blind, without eyes, don’t know, and don’t see it. How am I like those who are blind, without eyes, don’t know, and don’t see it?”
{:#p6}

7\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and approved.
{:#p7}

### Notes
 {:#n1} This sūtra is parallel with [SN 22.94](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.94){:target="_blank"} and [SĀ 1.150](SA1_150.html). [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 14 September 2020
{: .revised}

---