---
layout: default
title: 'The Related Discourses | 1. The Aggregates | 147. Three Upright Men'
type: kramdown
base: ../../
previous: SA1_146.html
next: ../SA_02/index.html
---

# [The Related Discourses](../index.html)
## [1. The Aggregates](index.html)
### 147. Three Upright Men

1\. Thus have I heard: One time, the Buddha was staying in Cedi at the Bamboo Park Monastery.
{:#p1}

2\. At that time, there were three upright men who had left home not long before. They were Venerable Aniruddha, Venerable Nandika, and Venerable Kimbila.
{:#p2}

3\. It was then that the Bhagavān knew what they were thinking in their minds, and so he instructed them. “Monks, this mind, this thinking, this awareness should be reflected upon in this way: ‘Don’t reflect in this way, stop this desire, stop this form.’ Someone who realizes this abides perfectly. Monk, would have form if it were permanent, unchanging, and a correct abode?”
{:#p3}

The monks said to the Buddha, “No, Bhagavān.”

4\. The Buddha told the monks, “Good, good! Forms are impermanent and things that changes. Tiring and parting with desire for them, they cease, become tranquil, and disappear. Thus, since the distant past, forms are all impermanent, painful, and things that change. Knowing them thus, it’s the conditioning of those forms that produces the contaminants that are harmful, burning, and grievous. Stop and cease them all. Once they are ceased and stopped, there’s no attachment. Once there’s no attachment, you’ll live in well-being. Once you live in well-being, you’ll attain parinirvāṇa. Feelings, perceptions, volitions, and consciousness are likewise.”
{:#p4}

5\. When the Buddha spoke this sūtra, those three upright men didn’t produce the contaminants, and their minds were liberated.
{:#p5}

6\. After the Buddha spoke this sūtra, the monks who heard what the Buddha taught rejoiced and handed it down.
{:#p6}

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 28 August 2020
{: .revised}

---