---
layout: default
title: 'The Numerical Discourses | 10. The Guarded Mind | 6. The Stingy and the Tireless'
type: kramdown
base: ../../../
previous: EA_10_05.html
next: EA_10_07.html
---

# [The Numerical Discourses](../index.html)
## Chapter 10: The Guarded Mind
### 6. The Stingy and the Tireless

1\. Thus I have heard:[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} One time, the Buddha was staying at Anāthapiṇḍada’s Park in Jeta’s Grove of Śrāvastī.
{:#p1}

2\. It was then that the Bhagavān addressed the monks, “Just as I know now the source of the destinies of sentient beings, I also know the rewards of generosity. Even the last lump of food that one doesn’t eat themselves should be given to someone else. Then, they won’t allow themselves to have even a hair’s breadth of stinginess. These sentient beings don’t know the rewards of generosity like I know them in their entirety. They are no different than the rewards of an equitable heart. Therefore, sentient beings who aren’t capable of equitable generosity bring their own downfalls. Their minds are constantly wrapped in stingy thoughts.”
{:#p2}

3\. The Bhagavān then spoke in verse:
{:#p3}

* {:.verse}“Sentient beings don’t realize it themselves,\\
But this is what the Tathāgata teaches:\\
One should always be generous to all\\
And focus on becoming a true man.

* {:.verse}When their inclinations are purified,\\
The merits gained are multiplied many times.\\
Sharing equal parts of their merit,\\
They later obtain a great reward.

* {:.verse}What they give in the present is good!\\
Their hearts head for a broad field of merit.\\
They depart from among humans,\\
Sure to be born up in Heaven.

* {:.verse}By reaching that good place,\\
They’ll enjoy their own happiness.\\
They’ll rejoice over their good fortune,\\
And won’t be in want of anything.

* {:.verse}With heavenly authority and deeds,\\
Beautiful women will be their followers.\\
The rewards of equitable giving,\\
Therefore, obtain these fortunes.”

4\. When the monks heard what the Buddha taught, they rejoiced and approved.
{:#p4}

---

### Notes

1. {:#n1} This <em>sūtra</em> is similar to [Iti 26](https://suttacentral.net/iti26){:target="_blank"}. [\[back\]](#ref1)

---

Translator: Charles Patton
{: .translator}
Last Revised: 27 March 2023
{: .revised}

---